===== page 1 =====
Bankrolling
THE BANKING SECTOR’S ROLE IN THE
GLOBAL BIODIVERSITY CRISIS
===== page 2 =====
The global
About us
ecosystem
portfolio.earth is a new initiative born out of rising
concerns that our finance sector is not taking the
human-induced sixth mass extinction seriously and
is actively providing capital to sectors that gov-
is rapidly
ernments and scientists agree is deemed harmful
to biodiversity.
portfolio.earth is a collaborative effort - a collective
of individuals working with others to take on the
approaching
finance industry’s role in contributing to the destruc-
tion of nature.
We aim to bring together diverse voices to amplify
the incredible pressure that is mounting upon the
a planetary
finance industry and its role in bankrolling extinction,
find new ways to tell this story, and double down on
the changes we need to see.
For more information please contact
tipping point.
info@portfolio.earth or visit our website
===== page 3 =====
Executive Summary Forestry, wood products &
Pg, 6-11 non-food forest commodities
Pg, 54-59
The global
biodiversity crisis Mining for metals & minerals
Pg, 12-13 Pg, 60-65
Results Fossil Fuels
Pg, 14 Pg, 66-71
Finance of industry sectors Infrastructure
with biodiversity risks Pg, 72-77
Pg, 16-23
Tourism
Bank policies limiting Pg, 78-83
biodiversity impacts
Pg, 24-29 Movement of goods
and people
Rewriting of financing rules Pg, 84-89
Pg, 30-35
Appendix: Methodologies
Sector-specific Results Pg, 90-105
Pg, 38-41
Food system
(Fisheries & Agriculture)
Pg, 42-53
stnetnoC 1.0 4.2
1.1
4.3
2.0 4.4
2.1 4.5
4.6
2.2
4.7
3
5
4
4.1
4 5
BANKROLLING EXTINCTION BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 4 =====
We are currently in the midst of a mass
extinction event. Termed the ‘Anthropocene
Extinction’, this is the first of its kind to be
caused by humans. Humans have impacted
nearly every corner of the planet and are
approaching planetary boundaries which
could take millions of years to recover
from.1 Scientists are warning of ‘biological
annihilation’.2 While governments and
companies have been the focus of attention
on this issue, actors in the finance sector
have largely evaded scrutiny until recently.
6
yrammuS
evitucexE
0.1
This report shows how banks are funding the The financial sector is bankrolling the mass
destruction of nature. extinction crisis, while undermining human
rights and indigenous sovereignty. This report
calls for:
In 2019, the world’s largest banks invested Banks to disclose and radically reduce their
more than USD 2.6 trillion (equivalent to impact on nature and stop finance for new
Canada’s GDP) in sectors which govern- fossil fuels, deforestation, overfishing and
ments and scientists agree are the primary ecosystem destruction.
drivers of biodiversity destruction.
Importantly, none of the banks assessed Governments to stop protecting the role
have chosen to put sufficient systems in of banks in biodiversity destruction and
place to monitor or measure the impact of rewrite the rules of finance to hold banks lia-
their loans on biodiversity, nor do they have ble for the damage caused by their lending.
comprehensive policies to halt it.
Banks play a key role in a financial sys- People everywhere to have a say in how
tem that free rides on biodiversity, and their money is invested, and a right to
the regulators and rules which govern stop banks from causing serious harm
banks currently protect them from any to people and planet.
consequences.
6 7
1.0 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 5 =====
Demands
Why this matters • Among the top ten banks assessed were also
Human life, and our survival, depends on our three Japanese banks (Mizuho Financial, Mit-
environment. Covid-19 has shown us that nature subishi Financial and the Sumitomo Mitsui The financial sector is bankrolling the mass extinction
underpins the functioning of our health, societies, Banking Corporation). crisis, while undermining human rights and indige-
and economies. The risk of these sorts of diseases • BNP Paribas, HSBC, and Barclays were the three nous sovereignty. This report calls for:
is kept in check by healthy environments and diverse European banks within the top ten assessed.
species.3 When we radically alter nature, we risk • A raft of Chinese banks, considered the world’s
creating the conditions in which pandemics emerge. largest banks, can be found further down the list. Banks to disclose and radically reduce their
Environmental destruction can no longer be • Thirty-two per cent of all loans and underwriting impact on nature and stop finance for new
seen as an unfortunate by-product of economic were associated with infrastructure, 25 per cent fossil fuels, deforestation, overfishing and
development, quite the reverse. Our abusive relation- with metal and mineral mining, and a further 20 per ecosystem destruction.
ship with nature is contributing to an USD 8 trillion4 cent with fossil fuels.
hole in our global economy, rising unemployment, • While food production (agriculture and fisheries)
and social inequality. Recent analysis suggests was only connected to 10 per cent of all invest- Governments to stop protecting banks’ role
that Covid-19 has reversed the global development ments, this sector is considered to have the largest in biodiversity destruction and rewrite the
agenda back 25 years in just 25 weeks.5 If we protect impact on global biodiversity.7 rules of finance to hold banks liable for the
nature, nature protects us. damage caused by their lending.
Half of the world’s GDP is indebted to nature6 To prevent extinction, banks have to stop
and the services it provides such as pollination, funding it.
water quality, and disease control. The dependence Scientists and governments agree8 that the People everywhere to have a say in how
of many more industries is hidden in their supply global food production system, forestry, mining, their money is invested, and a right to stop
chains. Despite this, the global economy continues fossil fuels, infrastructure, tourism, and the reloca- banks from causing serious harm to people
to free ride on nature. For the first time, this report tion of goods and people have all been identified as and planet.
attempts to quantify the loans and underwriting primary drivers of the global extinction crisis. Even
provided by some of the largest banks in the world though many of these activities are carried out by We cannot rely on banks to find the answer. We need
to companies operating in economic sectors that companies, it is the finance sector that bankrolls and a radical overhaul of how our financial system creates
governments and scientists agree are primary drivers enables this activity. liability, accountability, and responsibility to protect
of biodiversity loss. Banks make decisions and invest in sectors and restore nature.
Most of the funding assessed (66 per cent) was which governments and scientists agree are driving
related to activities that directly cause biodiversity the devastation of our planet and societies. Recent
loss (e.g. fishing, mining) and 34 per cent was invested scandals9 have shown that left to themselves, some
in companies which indirectly drive biodiversity loss of the largest banks in the world will game the system.
(e.g. by driving demand along the supply chain from Other actors within the financial sector are also likely
retail or processing and trading of commodities, to be complicit in funding the sectors that drive the
such as construction which creates demand for destruction of nature.
raw materials). Governments and scientists agree that to halt
Analysis of bank policies regarding biodiversity and reverse the current biodiversity crisis, nothing
The banks
has shown that not a single one of these banks has short of transformative change10 is required. Con-
sufficient systems in place to measure, report, and crete action must come from all parts of our political
radically reduce the environmental impacts caused economy – banks, regulators, other financial actors,
are unwilling
by its finance activities. Put simply, the banks are the judiciary, governments, and citizens. All mem-
unwilling and have not prepared to tackle the bio- bers of the financial system, including those that
diversity crisis. govern and drive it, must act to create the right rules,
and have not
responsibilities and culture to halt and reverse the
Other key findings of the banks assessed decline of nature.
in this report include: The current climate, Covid-19, and ecological
prepared to
• O n average, each of the 50 banks included in the crises are radicalising communities and activists.
research were linked to finance with biodiversity The scrutiny the finance industry and other eco-
risk to the tune of USD 52 billion each. This ranges nomic actors are facing about their contribution is
tackle the
from more than 210 billion for the largest investor mounting (see Notable Examples of Recent Scrutiny
to 1.3 billion for the smallest. in Section 3). In limited cases, banks and the finance
• The top three of the 10 banks with the largest industry have begun to respond by measuring their
biodiversity
exposure to biodiversity risks were headquartered exposure. New approaches to biodiversity loss dis-
in the USA. Around 26 per cent of all loans and closure11 and new initiatives such as the Finance for
underwritings by the 50 banks were linked to Biodiversity Banking pledge12 have been launched
crisis.
Bank of America, Citigroup and JP Morgan Chase. recently. These developments are being watched
Wells Fargo, another American bank, was the and cautiously welcomed. But they are no substitute
fifth largest investor in industry sectors with high for urgent transformative action from banks and the
biodiversity risks. governance system they operate in.
8 9
1.0 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 6 =====
FIGURE 1: LOANS AND UNDERWRITING BY BANKS LINKED TO DIRECT AND INDIRECT BIODIVERSITY IMPACT RISKS 2019, (MILLION USD)
AND PERCENTAGE OF FINANCE AT RISK OF BIODIVERSITY IMPACTS COMPARED TO TOTAL ASSETS 2019, (MILLION USD)
INDIRECT VS TOTAL ASSETS DIRECT VS TOTAL ASSETS INDIRECT (MILLION USD) DIRECT (MILLION USD)
12.0 % 10.0 % 8.0 % 6.0 % 4.0 % 2.0 % 0.0 % 0
50,000 100,000 150,000 200,000 250,000
BANK OF AMERICA
CITIGROUP
JP MORGAN CHASE
MIZUHO FINANCIAL
WELLS FARGO
BNP PARIBAS
MITSUBISHI UFJ FINANCIAL
HSBC
SMBC GROUP
BARCLAYS
GOLDMAN SACHS
CRÉDIT AGRICOLE
MORGAN STANLEY
BANK OF CHINA
ROYAL BANK OF CANADA
SOCIÉTÉ GÉNÉRALE
DEUTSCHE BANK
TORONTO-DOMINION BANK
CREDIT SUISSE
SANTANDER
ING GROUP
CHINA CONSTRUCTION BANK
UNICREDIT
INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL BANK
AGRICULTURAL BANK OF CHINA
BANCO BILBAO VIZCAYA ARGENTARIA
BPCE GROUP
UBS
NATWEST
RABOBANK
DBS
INTESA SANPAOLO
LLOYDS BANKING GROUP
OVERSEA-CHINESE BANKING
CRÉDIT MUTUEL CIC GROUP
COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA
NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK
DZ BANK
NORINCHUKIN BANK
STATE BANK OF INDIA
BANCO DO BRASIL
CIMB GROUP
BRADESCO
MALAYSIAN BANKING
BANK MANDIRI
SBERBANK
STANDARD BANK
HDFC BANK
SHIN FINANCIAL GROUP
FIRSTRAND
10 11
1.0 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 7 =====
labolG
ehT
1.1
sisirC
ytisrevidoiB
The planet is in the midst of a major
The world’s flora and fauna continue to be in A significant amount of biodiversity loss is
mass extinction event – the first of rapid decline. Three-quarters of the planet’s land driven by unsustainable business practices financed
surface and two-thirds of its ocean areas are signifi- by banks and investors and fuelled by growing
its kind caused by humans, and one cantly altered. Only 13 per cent of ocean and 23 per global demand for products. Banks are not being
cent of land areas are still classified as wilderness.13 held accountable.
which is threatening the biological Many international agreements have tried but It has been estimated that unsustainable prac-
not succeeded to halt and reverse biodiversity loss. tices result in a loss of ecosystem services of between
annihilation of life on our planet. Banking Notable examples include biodiversity targets set USD 4 and 20 trillion every year from land-use
ten years ago in Aichi (2010), the World Summit on change alone.17 Industry sectors with particularly
and finance practices are contributing Sustainable Development and the United Nations high biodiversity impacts include food production
General Assembly endorsement of the Global Biodi- (fisheries, aquaculture and agriculture), mining and
significantly to this. To date, their impact versity Target held 18 years ago, and the establish- the extraction of fossil fuels, infrastructure, tourism,
ment of the Convention on Biological Diversity by the and the movement of people and goods around the
on biodiversity remains unchecked. Rio Earth Summit 28 years ago. world via transport and logistics.
The United Nations recently found that not one Under increasing public pressure to reduce the
of the twenty Aichi Global Biodiversity Targets agreed impacts of global supply chains, companies, and to
in 2010 have been met.14 a much lesser extent banks, have begun to adopt
The present extinction rate of species is up largely voluntary policies to not engage or fund some
to 10,000 times higher than the background rate.15 of the practices with the worst biodiversity and cli-
This is why scientists argue the earth is undergoing mate change impacts (such as deforestation to make
its sixth major mass extinction event in its 4.5 billion space for palm oil, soy and beef, or refusing loans
year history. The current Anthropocene Extinction for coal, oil and gas activities in fragile eco-systems
is the first such event caused by a single species, such as the Arctic).
humans, consciously destroying the biodiversity and However, many of these promises to protect
ecosystem services it relies on for its own survival. It nature have been woefully insufficient to stabilise
is also up to humans, and the systems they operate biodiversity and have not been implemented suc-
within, to reverse it. cessfully or widely enough to reduce the rate at which
More recently, the Covid-19 virus has demon- human industrial activities are driving extinction. They
strated that the fate of our health, societies, and do not represent the transformative change of our
economies are inextricably linked to nature. Radically economic system required to maintain biodiversity
altering nature and reducing biodiversity risks creat- and the ecosystem services. Brazil is currently the
ing conditions in which pandemics emerge. only country where lender environmental liability
In 2019, hundreds of experts around the world allows for the financial institution to be held liable for
contributed to the largest assessment of global environmental harm caused by the borrower, strictly
biodiversity ever carried out. The Intergovernmental and without limitation.18
Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Eco- Banks have shown reluctance to take respon-
system Services (IPBES) analysed more than 15,000 sibility for the impacts of their lending portfolio
scientific publications and government sources and elsewhere. For instance, the CEO of Goldman Sachs
concluded that one million animal and plant species argued in January 2020 that the bank should not
were now threatened with extinction, more than ever decline to work on deals with companies that lack
before in human history. More than 40 per cent of environmental credentials. He said: “Should we draw
amphibian species, almost 33 per cent of reef-form- a line and say we will not raise money for a company
ing corals, and more than a third of all marine mam- that is a carbon company, a fossil fuel company? And
mals are considered threatened today. the answer to that is, we’re not going to do that, we’re
The IPBES report, endorsed by scientists and not going to draw a line.”19 Considering the unwilling-
governments, found current policies and conserva- ness of banks to participate in a necessary, rapid shift
tion efforts are insufficient to protect and sustainably of the banking system, legislative measures such as
use nature. In order to ensure the long-term sustain- lender environmental liability will have to be a major
ability of our resources and protect biodiversity, the component of any such transformation.
authors of the IPBES report concluded that “trans-
formative changes across economic, social, political
and technological factors” are needed.16
The United Nations recently found that not one of the
twenty Aichi Global Biodiversity Targets agreed in
2010 have been met.
12 13
1.1 THE GLOBAL BIODIVERSITY CRISIS BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 8 =====
2
Results
Bankrolling
===== page 9 =====
fo
ecnaniF
1.2
htiw
srotceS
yrtsudnI
sksiR
ytisrevidoiB
The 50 banks included in this research report
were identified by portfolio.earth and consist
of the world’s largest banks, as well as other
banks known to operate in regions of particular
importance to biodiversity.
Quantification of the Value of Finance Among the banks included in this analysis are
Provided by Banks to Companies 20 European banks (linked to 36 per cent of the total
Operating in Sectors with Biodiversity Risks finance with risk of biodiversity impact identified in
The consultancy Profundo used the Refinitiv this report), 18 banks in the Asia Pacific region (24.7
database (formerly known as Thomson Reuters per cent), 8 in North America (38.7 per cent) and
Eikon) to identify and calculate corporate loans, two each in South America (0.4 per cent) and Africa
project finance, general corporate purposes finance, (0.1 per cent). Forty-four of the banks are amongst
share issuance and bond issuance for 72 business the largest 100 in the world by total assets, while
sectors, industry groups and industries identified the rest are located in key regions of particularly
by portfolio.earth as being linked to biodiversity high biodiversity.
impact risks.
The business sectors included are from the The Top Ten Banks
Thomson Reuters Business classification (TRBC). • From the top ten banks, infrastructure received the
The loans within the business sectors were then largest percentage of finance, followed by the metal
matched to key human activities and drivers the and mineral mining sector, and fossil fuels. Tourism
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodi- and the forestry sector accounted for the smallest
versity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES)20 identified percentages of the identified finance.
as fuelling the global biodiversity crisis. • Within the top ten, Japanese banks provided
significantly more finance to infrastructure and
These, slightly adapted, sectors are: mining-related industries than their counterparts
• Food system and agricultural commodities headquartered in Europe and the USA.
• Forestry and non-food forest commodities • The three European banks within the top ten
• Metal and mineral mining invested comparatively heavily in the food sector,
• Fossil fuels while the USA banks provided slightly more finance
• Infrastructure on average to companies within the transportation
• Tourism and logistics sector than banks from other regions.
• Relocation of goods and people
16 17
2.0 RESULTS BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 10 =====
Radically
altering nature,
we risk creating
the conditions
in which
pandemics
emerge.
18 19
2.0 RESULTS BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 11 =====
TABLE 1: OVERVIEW OF INCLUDED BANKS BY TOTAL FINANCE AT RISK OF HAVING BIODIVERSITY IMPACTS (MILLION USD) FIGURE 2: HUMAN DRIVERS OF BIODIVERSITY LOSS AS PERCENTAGE OF AT-RISK BANK FINANCE
COUNTRY REGION NUMBER OF BANKS TOTAL FINANCE AT 100%
FORESTRY & NON-FOOD FOREST COMMODITIES
(HEADQUARTERS) RISK IN 2019
90% TOURISIM
80% RELOCATION OF GOODS AND PEOPLE
USA North America 6 877,804
FOOD PRODUCTION AND AGRICULTRAL COMMODITIES
70%
FOSSIL FUELS
Japan Asia Pacific 4 384,256 100% 60% METALS & MINERAL MINING
FORESTRY & NON-FOOD FOREST COMMODITIES
50% INFRASTRUCTURE
90% TOURISIM
France Europe 5 314,739
40%
80% RELOCATION OF GOODS AND PEOPLE
30%
UK Europe 4 258,036 FOOD PRODUCTION AND AGRICULTRAL COMMODITIES
70%
20%
FOSSIL FUELS
China Asia Pacific 4 196,276 60% 10% METALS & MINERAL MINING
50% 0% INFRASTRUCTURE
BANK OF CITIGROUP JP MORGAN MIZUHO WELLS BNP PARIBAS MITSUBISHI HSBC SMBC GROUP BARCLAYS
Canada North America 2 133,040 AMERICA CHASE FINANCIAL FARGO UFJ
40% FINANCIAL
30%
Spain Europe 2 84,848
FORESTRY & NON-FOOD RELOCATION OF FOOD PRODUCTION AND
TOURISM
20% FOREST COMMODITIES GOODS & PEOPLE AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES
Switzerland Europe 2 77,802 90%
10% METALS & MINERAL
FOSSIL FUELS MINING INFRASTRUCTURE
80%
Germany Europe 2 75,191 0%
BANK7 O0%F CITIGROUP JP MORGAN MIZUHO WELLS BNP PARIBAS MITSUBISHI HSBC SMBC GROUP BARCLAYS
AMERICA CHASE FINANCIAL FARGO UFJ
FINANCIAL
Netherlands Europe 2 72,597 60%
50%
Italy Europe 2 56,222 FIGURE 3: PERCENTAGE OF FINANCE LINKED OF DIRECT AND INDIRECT BIODIVERSITY RISKS BY GEOGRAPHIC REGION
40%
90%
Singapore Asia Pacific 2 30,734 30%
80%
20%
Australia Asia Pacific 2 13,656
70%
10%
Brazil South America 2 10,703 60%
0%
AFRICA ASIA & PACIFIC EUROPE NORTH AMERICA SOUTH AMERICA
50%
Malaysia Asia Pacific 2 10,360
AVERAGE OF % DIRECT AVERAGE OF % INDIRECT
40%
India Asia Pacific 2 6,984
30%
South Africa Africa 2 3,428
20%
10%
Indonesia Asia Pacific 1 2,597
0%
Russia Europe 1 2,270
AFRICA ASIA & PACIFIC EUROPE NORTH AMERICA SOUTH AMERICA
South Korea Asia Pacific 1 1,362
AVERAGE % OF DIRECT AVEAVREARAGGEE O% FO F% IN DDIIRREECCTT AVERAGE OF % INDIRECT
20 21
2.0 RESULTS BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 12 =====
FIGURE 4: AVERAGE VALUE OF FINANCE LINKED TO DRIVERS OF BIODIVERSITY LOSS FOR BANKS
IN KEY REGIONS (2019, MILLION USD) AVERAGE PERCENTAGE OF FINANCE PER DRIVER OF
Type of Biodiversity Impact Regional and Sector Themes BIODIVERSITY FOR BANKS IN KEY REGIONS
Finance linked to the drivers of biodiversity • On average, North American banks invested USD
loss was classified as having either direct or indirect 126 billion each in industry sectors linked to bio-
impacts on biodiversity. For instance, gold mining diversity impacts. This was 2.7 times the USD 47
40,000 30,000 20,000 10,000 0
is considered to be at risk of having direct impact billion of finance provided on average by each of
while the use of gold in the electronics industry may the European banks, and 3.5 times the USD 36
INFRASTRUCTURE
indirectly impact biodiversity due to the value chain billion provided on average by each of the Asian
demands of the commodity. and Pacific banks.
Comparing percentages of direct and indirect • The highest percentage of loans and underwriting
impacts on biodiversity in relation to the total assets was allocated to infrastructure in four of the five
of the banks within specific geographic regions: geographic regions.
• B anks in Africa and the Asia Pacific Region invested • In Africa, finance for mining of metals and minerals
METALS & MINERAL MINING
more heavily in industries linked to direct impacts sectors was especially strong, receiving more than
than banks headquartered in North America or a third of all investments by the included banks
Europe. headquartered on the continent. Given a similar
• There was a near even split between direct and level of finance by these African banks was associ-
indirect impact risks for South American banks. ated with the fossil fuel sector, the remaining sectors
• Banks in China exhibited particularly high levels received less than one per cent of the total loans
of financing with risk of direct biodiversity impact on the continent. FOSSIL FUELS
(more than 80 per cent of all finance). This was • South American banks invested a much higher
eclipsed by banks in India and Russia but only one percentage in industries that could be either directly
bank from each of these countries was included in or indirectly linked to the global food system and
this research. agricultural commodities, as well as the forestry
• The one South Korean bank included on the top and non-food forest commodity sector. This is not
50 list had the smallest risk of direct impacts but surprising considering the role South American FOOD PRODUCTION &
the highest risk of funding indirect impacts on countries play in the supply of key agricultural com- AGRICULTURAL COMMODITIES
biodiversity. modities such as soy, corn, beef and sugar cane.
• Banks in Europe and North America exhibited simi-
Note the number of banks included in Africa lar financing patterns to each other. However, North
and South America was limited to two banks each. American banks invested a significantly higher
percentage in the fossil fuel sector, while a larger
RELOCATION OF GOODS
percentage of European banks’ loans was linked to & PEOPLE
the food system.
On average, each of the 50 banks included in the
TOURISM
research were linked to finance with biodiversity
risk to the tune of USD 52 billion.
FORESTRY & NON-FOREST
COMMODITIES
NORTH AMERICA EUROPE ASIA & PACIFIC SOUTH AMERICA AFRICA
22 23
2.0 RESULTS BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 13 =====
gnitimiL
seiciloP
knaB
2.2
stcapmI
ytisrevidoiB
The analysis clearly shows banks are not currently equipped
to understand, let alone reduce, the impacts their lending
portfolios have on biodiversity.
Not all finance provided by banks results in • Even the highest scoring bank, Banco Bilbao Viz-
significant negative biodiversity impacts. However, caya Argentaria (BBVA), scored below 40 and - like
to understand the effects on the natural environment all other banks - received poor grades for indicators
enabled by those loans which do, an appropriate that illustrated willingness to transform their sector.
measurement and monitoring system is required. • The four Chinese banks, ranked as the largest banks
This must include detailed policies and proce- in the world,21 scored particularly poorly in the policy
dures to ensure banks reduce their contribution to sector and had no exclusions.
the biodiversity crisis, alongside legal frameworks • Even though nearly all banks integrated sustain-
to hold banks liable in cases of significant negative ability considerations at the highest level of gov-
impacts on biodiversity. ernance, sustainability directors and departments
To put the loan calculations presented in the generally had no veto rights over particularly con-
previous chapter into context, and to analyse the troversial financing activities.
ability of banks to understand and avoid enabling bio- • A very small percentage of banks have made sus-
diversity loss, the selected banks’ policies towards tainability performance part of the remuneration
biodiversity and specific industry sectors have been and bonus packages of executive compensation.
reviewed and scored. However, these systems are not linked to biodi-
Banks could score a total of 100 points, which versity outcomes in particular and usually refer
were split between commitments (46 points) and broadly to Environmental, Social, and Governance
exclusions (54 points). (ESG) Criteria.
Commitments include actions such as integrat- • While 70 per cent of banks analysed have adopted
ing sustainability into governance, having a dedi- the Equator Principles (a risk management frame-
cated policy for biodiversity, the reporting of biodiver- work for determining, assessing, and managing
sity risks, and the development of biodiversity impact environmental and social risk),22 none of them
measurement systems for bank financing activities. publicly support the Aichi Biodiversity Targets of
Exclusions are corporate activities with large the Convection of Biological Diversity. Amongst
biodiversity impacts that banks have committed not other targets, the Aichi framework stipulates that
to fund, such as deforestation activities which impact “by 2020, at the latest, governments, business
high conservation value areas. and stakeholders at all levels have taken steps to
Banks were able to score points depending on achieve or have implemented plans for sustainable
the number of exclusion activities across the sectors production and consumption and have kept the
of fisheries and aquaculture, agriculture, forestry and impacts of use of natural resources well within safe
bioenergy, metal and mineral mining, fossil fuels, ecological limits.’’23
infrastructure, tourism, and logistics and transport. • Crucially, none of the banks support a range of
The full methodology and the detailed assessment for indicators that are considered vital to overhaul the
every bank can be found in the Appendix. way banks finance companies. These indicators
include the ability of savers to have a say in how
Results their money is being invested, the reporting of
The analysis clearly shows banks are not cur- biodiversity risks including disclosure of loans with
rently equipped to understand, let alone reduce, the high risks, and the stress-testing of balance sheets
impacts their lending portfolios have on biodiversity. for biodiversity impacts.
• All banks scored less than 40 points out of a total • The banks included did not report biodiversity risks
of 100. sufficiently, especially when compared to their
• The nine banks which scored the highest regarding reporting on climate risks.
their policies were all headquartered in Europe, • None of the banks had developed sufficient systems
but their scores were still far too low to ensure the to measure and monitor the impacts of their lending
companies they fund do not contribute to the global activities on biodiversity.
biodiversity crisis.
24 2255
2.0 RESULTS BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 14 =====
Policies - 43 max Exclusions- 54 max
FIGURE 5: BANK POLICY AND EXCLUSION SCORES
POLICIES EXCLUSIONS
0 10 20 30 40 0 10 20 30 40 50
BANCO BILBAO VIZCAYA ARGENTARIA
BNP PARIBAS
ING GROUP
UBS
LLOYDS BANKING GROUP
CRÉDIT AGRICOLE
NATWEST
HSBC
CREDIT SUISSE
GOLDMAN SACHS
RABOBANK
BARCLAYS
SOCIÉTÉ GÉNÉRALE
UNICREDIT
BPCE GROUP
DBS BANK
SANTANDER
FIRSTRAND
BANK OF AMERICA
OCBC BANK
DEUTSCHE BANK
TORONTO-DOMINION BANK
NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK
COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA
SMBC GROUP
CITIGROUP
JPMORGAN CHASE
CREDIT MUTUEL
BANCO DO BRASIL
INTESA SANPAOLO
MORGAN STANLEY
STANDARD BANK
CIMB GROUP
BRADESCO
ROYAL BANK OF CANADA
MIZUHO FINANCIAL
NORINCHUKIN BANK
MITSUBISHI UFJ FINANCIAL
DZ BANK
WELLS FARGO
CHINA CONSTRUCTION BANK
SHINHAN FINANCIAL GROUP
BANK MANDIRI
MALAYAN BANKING
STATE BANK OF INDIA
BANK OF CHINA
AGRICULTURAL BANK OF CHINA
INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL BANK OF CHINA
HDFC
SBERBANK
26 Banks that would like to access their full assessments or have concerns about the accuracy 27
2.0 RESULTS are encouraged to contact portfolio earth at info@portolio.earth BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 15 =====
Excluding activities with significant FIGURE 6: AVERAGE EXCLUSION SCORES OF ALL BANKS COMPARED TO
biodiversity impact MAXIMUM ACHIEVABLE POINTS None of the banks had
- Banks achieved the highest exclusion scores (aver-
100%
age points achieved compared to the maximum
developed sufficient systems
available points) in the fossil fuel sector, followed by
the agriculture sector (which includes agricultural
commodities such as palm oil). These are sectors
80% to measure and monitor
where the role of banks has received much public
scrutiny in recent years.
- Scores for exclusions in the fisheries sector were
the impacts of their lending
low, the sector is one of the most significant drivers 60%
of global biodiversity loss.
- Nearly half of all banks (40 per cent, or 20 out of
activities on biodiversity.
50) had no exclusion activities, enabling the fund-
ing of any project no matter the seriousness of the 40%
biodiversity impact linked to them.
Conclusions
20%
There were clear differentiations in the average
scores and locations of the headquarters of the
banks, with European banks performing best.
The average score of European banks was 21.7,
0%
nearly twice that of the seven North American and two
A a r a e n s f s r s d i p c e e t a t A h s c n e ) c t , i B o v t A h r e a s r e l n e y i a k l . v a s o P t i l o a ( u 1 n c m 2 i b fi . e 2 c e t t h e r w e a a e g c t e i h i o s n ) n . a t h B t s e r c a i o n s s k i k r z e s e o d f i o n 8 c f a t S a h u o n e s u d i b n t h a 7 g n . A 4 i k m m s p p ( o e t a o r in c ic t t t a a s s l F OSSIL F UEL A S G F O R R I C E U S L T T R U Y R M & E I B N I E O R E A N L E & R
F
G M IS Y E H T E A R L I E M S I N & I N A G Q UA C U I L N T F U R R A L E S O T G R IS U T C I C T U S R & E TRA NSP ORT T O URIS M
on biodiversity, and the policy and exclusion scores
could not be determined. This suggests that the
size of a bank is not an indicator for its ability and
willingness to develop biodiversity-related policies.
FIGURE 7: AVERAGE POLICY AND EXCLUSION SCORES BY BANKS IN KEY REGIONS
NORTH AMERICA EUROPE
7.4 POLICY | 4.8 EXCLUSION 7.9 POLICY | 13.8 EXCLUSION
SOUTH AMERICA AFRICA ASIA & PACIFIC
8.0 POLICY | 0.0 EXCLUSION 7.3 POLICY | 4.8 EXCLUSION 5.9 POLICY | 1.6 EXCLUSION
28 29
2.0 RESULTS BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 16 =====
3
Rewriting
of Financing
Rules
Bankrolling
30
BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 17 =====
In recent decades, an unprecedented
consolidation among corporate players has
taken place around the world. Today, 10 per
cent of the world’s public companies generate
80 per cent of all profit.24
Academics have described large corporations formative reduction of biodiversity loss. Similarly,
that control much of the supply chains in specific with few exceptions, international agreements have
industry as the “keystone actors of the Anthropo- failed to bend the curve of human economic activities
A Lack of Progress –
cene”, the proposed geological epoch characterised impacting the environment.29
by the impact humans have had on the environment In order to address the global biodiversity and
Forestry
and climate.25 extinction crisis, and to avoid reaching planetary
Since many of the banks included in this tipping points from which biodiversity and human
research are operating globally, and because the economy cannot recover, legal and regulatory Forests contain around 80 per cent of ter-
banking sector has also undergone significant con- change is required. Banks, as one of the key engines restrial biodiversity. Rainforests produce 40 per
solidation in recent decades,26,27,28 the same term behind many human economic activities, must be cent of the world’s oxygen while also providing
could be applied to banks. As a consequence of the accountable for the impacts of their finance activities pollination services to agriculture valued at USD
increasing concentration, an ever-smaller number of on nature. 12 billion per year.30 Efforts by companies and
banks provide corporate financing to an ever-smaller Alongside the immediate exclusion of prac- the finance industry to reduce deforestation
number of corporate supply chain actors. tices with devastating impacts on biodiversity, the is relatively well-established and developed in
Yet despite their increasing and global influence frameworks in which banks operate need to be comparison to other biodiversity challenges.
on the biodiversity crisis, banks have no liability for overhauled. This includes the systematic inclusion of Many companies have set goals to remove defor-
the damage they cause to biodiversity, except in biodiversity considerations in lending decisions, risk estation from their agricultural and timber supply
Brazil. This liability should apply in every geography management, and the development of correspond- chains by 2020. Yet many of them are missing
in which a bank has operations. Furthermore, the ing due diligence systems. It also necessitates the their deadlines - some of which were set at least
policy assessments included in this report show development of procedures to measure the impact a decade ago.31,32 In the case of palm oil, a key
banks have no comprehensive and specific policies lending activities have on biodiversity, and transpar- contributor to global deforestation in the tropics,
or due diligence mechanisms in place when it comes ency when it comes to reporting risks and impacts. companies that have pledged to remove any
to addressing their impact on nature. While some Most importantly, in order to cease funding activity palm oil linked to deforestation from their supply
banks have excluded funding a small subset of the with detrimental effects on nature, banks will have to chains continue to be found to be in violation of
worst industries, such as fossil fuels like coal or oil accept that as enablers of such activities, they are their commitments,33 even though some progress
sands, and a much smaller set of banks are aware co-responsible and liable for their impacts. has been made.34
of the effects loans might have on forests, it is clear Within the banking sector the situation is
banks do not consider themselves responsible arguably much worse. Seventy per cent of the 150
or liable for biodiversity impacts caused by their banks and investments firms analysed in 2019 for
lending activities. their commitments to prevent deforestation do
While it has been argued that voluntary sus- not have any.35 The lack of progress by companies
tainability commitments by companies, banks, has shown that voluntary measures alone will be
and investors are necessary and can translate into insufficient.
improvements, they are not sufficient. Voluntary
action is not a substitute for legal and regulatory
reform. Global initiatives such as the Consumer
Goods Forum, the United Nations Global Compact
(UNGC), the Equator Principles, and the Principles
for Responsible Investment have not led to trans-
32 33
3.0 REWRITING OF FINANCING RULES BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 18 =====
This report highlights the role of banks in financing
biodiversity destruction. Other groups and
organisations are actively finding solutions and
frameworks to overhaul the financial sector’s
investments in companies that harm biodiversity.
Recent notable examples of increasing scrutiny of
the financial sector’s impact on biodiversity loss A Systemic Accountability Framework by F4B Initiative
1. 4.
The Economics of Biodiversity:36 The Dasgupta The role of the animal agriculture sector, and Grant Citizens’ Biodiversity Rights Align Public Finance with Biodiversity
Review, due out this Autumn, will outline the the financial institutions investing in the sector, Financial institutions should take account of citizens’ Governments and public agencies should transpar-
impacts of biodiversity loss, the role of govern- has prompted campaigning pressure45 from a individual and collective biodiversity-related rights ently align all public finance to biodiversity-related
ment and economic actors, and solutions. number46 of civil society organisations. and preferences in their financing decisions, with policies, goals, and commitments.
governments clearly defining those rights. • Governments should eliminate or reform all biodi-
• Financial institutions should inform and empower versity-negative subsidies and taxes and develop
A new report37 by the Bank of the Netherlands Many civil society groups are undertaking key citizens to make biodiversity-related choices, as and scale up incentives for biodiversity restoration.
(DNB) and the Netherlands Environmental campaigns against particular banks around savers, lenders, insurers, consumers, voters and • Governments and public agencies should integrate
Assessment Agency (PBL) has outlined the risks specific commodities. For example, Rainfor- taxpayers. biodiversity impact criteria into public procurement,
to the financial sector associated with Biodiver- est Action Network has, together with other • Regulators should require financial institutions investments and financial instrument design, sover-
sity loss, echoed by thought leaders IIPP38. NGOS, analysed investments in the forest risk to adopt compliance processes to respect the eign debt arrangements, and monetary practices.
commodity sector47 and fossil fuel sector48 for heritage rights of indigenous communities to bio-
a number of years. The recent analysis from diversity stewardship and use, and to respect their 5.
The legal profession is also taking note: the Stand.Earth and Amazon Watch49 outlined the traditional livelihoods. Align Private Finance with Public Policy
Commonwealth Climate and Law Initiative39 role of European Banks in financing the trade Financial institutions should ensure that their activ-
explores the potential biodiversity-related of controversial oil extracted from the Amazon. 2. ities are consistent with biodiversity-related public
liability risks for financial institutions. A new report50 from Mighty Earth investigates Disclose Impact policies, goals, and commitments.
the role of banks such as BNP Paribas, ADM Financial institutions should publicly disclose actual • Regulators should require financial institutions to
Capital and others in Industrial Deforesta- and expected biodiversity impacts and associated align their financial practices, including the design
The Paulson Institute40 recently launched a tion to produce rubber. The new addition of risks. of financial instruments, with the biodiversity-re-
report making the case for a comprehensive, the Stop the Money51 pipeline campaign is tar- • Regulators should require financial institutions to lated public policies and biodiversity-related inter-
worldwide effort to protect and value nature as geting some of the biggest actors in the financial regularly and publicly report the biodiversity impact national public policy commitments in jurisdictions
an insurance policy against the human conse- sector such as Blackrock and JP Morgan of their entire balance sheets, and to stress-test where they operate.
quences of biodiversity loss and outlined the over their role in funding resource extraction expected biodiversity risk.
ways in which we can reorient financial flows and the consequences upon local and • Financial institutions should make the data and 6.
towards restoration of nature. indigenous communities. assumptions underlying these reported impacts Integrate Biodiversity into Financial
and risks publicly available to enable effective citi- Governance
One recent set of recommendations from zen and shareholder action, and to facilitate the set- The governance of global finance should accept
ShareAction’s recent report on Asset Managers the Finance for Biodiversity (F4B) project aims ting of effective standards, policies, and regulation. accountability for impacts on biodiversity.
and Biodiversity Loss41 demonstrated that none to drive leading-edge research and analysis to • Financial regulators and monetary authorities,
of the world’s largest asset managers have a strengthen the link between biodiversity and 3. including central banks, should assess and explain
dedicated policy on biodiversity. financing decisions. The project has devel- Create Liability for Biodiversity the actual and likely impacts of their decisions and
oped a Finance Accountability Framework that Legal systems should make financial institutions actions on biodiversity.
includes six elements to transform the finance liable for biodiversity impacts.
Investors are coming under increasing pres- system. This framework is replicated on the • Legislators should extend liability for biodiversity
sure42 and using their influence43 in response following page. damage to the infringing companies’ banks and
to the massive public outrage44 to the Amazon other financing institutions.
Fires. • Regulators should require financial institutions and
corporates to establish biodiversity protection as a
public fiduciary responsibility of company directors
in their corporate governance.
34 35
3.0 REWRITING OF FINANCING RULES BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 19 =====
It is clear banks
do not consider
themselves
responsible
or liable for
biodiversity
impacts caused
by their lending
activities.
36 37
3.0 REWRITING OF FINANCING RULES BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 20 =====
4
Sector-
specific
Results
Bankrolling
===== page 21 =====
The value of loans to companies operating in the
key biodiversity impacting sectors were calculated
In order to address the global biodiversity and extinction crisis,
and the results for each of these sectors, as well
as their impacts on biodiversity, are in the following
and to avoid reaching planetary tipping points from which
chapters.
In order to achieve this, a matrix that links Refin-
biodiversity and human economy cannot recover, legal and
itiv business codes to the key drivers of biodiversity
loss identified by IPBES was developed. This allows
regulatory change is required.
for the calculation of finance that is linked to each
driver of biodiversity loss. However, many industry
codes can have multiple and simultaneous effects on
biodiversity and are therefore associated with more
than one driver of biodiversity loss. In such instances,
the value of loans was split equally between the asso-
ciated biodiversity impact sectors in order to keep the
total value of loans the same. For instance, if a bank
loan of USD 50 million was identified within the Food
Retail and Distribution business code, USD 25 million
each was assigned to the two relevant biodiversity
impact sectors: food production and the relocation
of goods and people. The full classifications of indus-
tries against the biodiversity impact sectors can be
found in the Appendix.
The sectors included in the bar charts in this
chapter were selected according to their size, posi-
tion in the supply chain and biodiversity impacts.
40 41
4.0 SECTOR-SPECIFIC RESULTS BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 22 =====
metsyS
dooF
1.4
&
seirehsiF(
)erutlucirgA
Results Fisheries & Agriculture
In 2019, the banks included in this analysis The food and agriculture sector is a USD 8.7
provided more than USD 380 billion of finance to trillion industry52 that comprises 10 per cent of
the food sector which includes activities related to global consumer spending. Moreover, 65 per cent
agriculture, fisheries, and aquaculture. This is one of poor working adults rely on agriculture for their
of the sectors identified by the IPBES as the largest livelihoods.53
drivers of biodiversity loss globally. Without relevant The fishery and agricultural sectors in particular
policies, funding exclusions, monitoring and report- have been identified as primary drivers of global
ing systems, and ultimately legal liability for negative biodiversity loss.54 In 2019, 380 billion USD worth of
impacts, the loans risk contributing to the global loans and underwriting were provided to this sector
biodiversity crisis. from the banks included in this research. Twenty per
The three largest banks financing the sector cent of this was associated with direct impact on
were all from the United States of America. No Jap- biodiversity, particularly from business sectors such
anese banks can be found amongst the ten largest as agricultural chemicals, fishing, and farming. The
financiers of the sector, which are entirely made bank with the largest percentage of its total assets
up of European and USA-based banks. Amongst linked to the food systems was Rabobank. This is
the companies which received the largest share of not surprising since it is well known as a leader in the
the funding were supermarkets, food processing agricultural banking sector around the world. Bank
companies, and international grain traders such of America, Citigroup and JPMorgan Chase were
as Cargill, Archer Daniels Midland, and Bunge. A identified as the largest absolute investors.
number of companies linked to leather goods also
received significant bank finance, as did a number of
palm oil companies in Indonesia. Nevertheless, since
many of the companies on the bank loan sheets are
positioned further along the value chain, the majority
of the loans identified were predominantly linked to
indirect biodiversity impact risks.
FIGURE 8: TEN BANKS WITH LARGEST FINANCE AT RISK IN
THE FOOD SYSTEM SECTOR (2019, MILLION USD)
30,000
45% 25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
55%
5,000
TOTAL LOANS OF ALL 50 BANKS:
USD 380 BILLION
0
TOP TEN BANKS
REST FOOD FOOD, RETAIL & FISHING & AGRICULTURAL OTHER
PROCESSING DISTRIBUTION FARMING CHEMICALS
42 43
4.1. FOOD SYSTEM FISHERIES & AGRICULTURE BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 23 =====
Fisheries,
Aquaculture
& Seafood
Industry Scope
Global fish production reached nearly 180 mil- the northeast Atlantic (Europe) and northwest Pacific
lion tons in 2018 and the value of the industry is more (China, Japan, and Russia). The nutrient-rich waters
than USD 400 billion.56 With long-term trends of the off South America and West Africa are also consid-
capture fisheries remaining relatively stable in recent ered focus points.59
years, much of the growth of these sectors originates China is by far the largest producer of fish and
from an increase in aquaculture production which accounts for 35 per cent of the world’s total produc-
now accounts for 42 per cent of total production. tion with a further 34 per cent from the other countries
Nevertheless, in 2018 (the last available data at the in Asia, 14 per cent from the Americas, and 10 per
time of writing), capture fisheries reached a record cent from Europe. Africa and Oceania contribute 7
96.4 million tonnes and 88 per cent of this was pro- per cent and 1 per cent respectively to global pro-
duced in marine fisheries.57 duction. Aquaculture production is a big contributor
It has been estimated that 60 million people to the dominance of Asian countries in the fishing
are engaged in the primary capture and aquaculture industry. Around 90 per cent of all aquaculture takes
fisheries alone and they operate more than 4.5 million place on the Asian continent.
fishing vessels.58 Ninety per cent of commercial fish- Overall, around 90 per cent of global produc-
ers (over 100 million people) are engaged in smaller tion is used for direct human consumption, with the
scale fishery activities. However, small scale fishing majority of the remainder utilised to produce fish oil
accounts for just under half of the total global fish and fishmeal for the aquaculture industry.60 Seven-
catch. The other half of global fish production is quite teen per cent of the world’s animal protein intake
concentrated, with global fishing hot spots including comes from fish consumption.61
44 45
4.1 FOOD SYSTEM FISHERIES & AGRICULTURE BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 24 =====
FIGURE 9: INVESTMENTS IN THE FOOD SYSTEM SECTOR IN 2019 AS A PERCENTAGE OF THEIR TOTAL ASSETS
Rabobank Goldman ING Group Wells Fargo BNP JPMorgan
Paribas Chase
Sachs 0.82% 0.72%
1.65%
0.71% 0.70%
1.15%
HSBC Credit Deutsche UniCredit
Suisse Bank
0.64% 0.59%
Bank of
0.61% 0.60%
America
1.06%
Morgan
Royal Bank of Banco Santander Mitsubishi UFJ NatWest
Financial
Canada Bilbao 0.41% 0.37%
Stanley 0.38%
Vizcaya
0.57%
Argentaria
1.24% (BBVA)
Barclays 0.50%
BPCE Group Malayan Intesa DBS
Banking Sanpaolo
0.36% 0.23%
0.25% 0.25%
0.94%
Mizuho
Banco do
Financial
Brasil
0.54%
0.43% Crédit Other
Citigroup SMBC Group Mutuel CIC
Group
0.35%
0.20%
1.18%
Société
CIMB
Crédit
Toronto- Group
Agricole
Générale Dominion 0.20%
Bradesco
0.52% Bank
0.34%
0.83% 0.42%
UBS
0.14%
46 47
4.1. FOOD SYSTEM FISHERIES & AGRICULTURE BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 25 =====
FIGURE 10: TOP EXPORTERS OF FISH PRODUCTS (2018, MILLION USD)55
Biodiversity impacts
The economic importance and ever-increasing • Seamounts have incredible biodiversity with many
NORWAY
production and consumption of fish has had pro- endemic species, but this diversity has also made
12,000
found impacts on fish stocks and aquatic ecosys- them lucrative targets of the fishing industry and
tems. Even though fewer species live in aquatic com- they are particularly vulnerable to bottom trawling.
pared to terrestrial ecosystems, the world’s oceans In Southern Australia for instance, where heavy
and rivers are nevertheless very rich in biodiversity, fishing occurs around coral seamounts, 90 per
CHINA
in particular on the continental shelves.62 Importantly, cent of the surfaces where coral grew are now bare
17,100
the footprint of industrial fishing covers more than 55 rock. Even in the Great Barrier Reef World Heritage
INDIA per cent of ocean areas.63 Area, seafloor trawling for prawns and scallops has
6,500 VIETNAM Today, three-quarters of major marine fish stocks caused localised extinction of some coral species.70
7,200 are fully or over-exploited or depleted.64 The stocks • Drift nets are large nets that hang vertically in water
fished at unsustainable levels more than tripled from and can reach 35 metres in height and up to 20 kilo-
10 per cent to 34 per cent in recent decades.65 The metres in length.71 One fishing operation in Japan
impact of fishing activities goes beyond the imme- used 24 drift nets with a total netting area of around
diate effects on target species. It can also lead to 700 kilometres. In addition to the targeted skipjack
changes in the physical structure of the environment, tuna, the catch of 97 dolphins, 10 turtles, 21 manta
CHILE reduction in megafauna and top predators through rays, and 11 whales was reported.72 Even though
6,500 bycatch, and changes to the nutrient flow within the United Nations General Assembly established
marine ecosystems.66 Since overfishing can cause an international moratorium prohibiting the use of
chain reactions that decrease marine biodiversity nets over 2.5 kilometres in length, and the Euro-
drastically, it has even been argued that there will be pean Union banned their use in 2013, they are still
no seafood left in 40 years’ time if no action is taken.67 widely used.73 It has been estimated that every year
• Bottom trawling is a destructive fishing method 640,000 tons of fishing gear (including drift nets) is
where large nets, metal doors, and chains are lost, abandoned, or discarded in the world’s ocean,
dragged over the seafloor. This can cause the col- killing huge numbers of commercially valuable or
lapse of specific ecosystem functions, especially threatened species.74
Total trade value: 148,000 in deeper waters. Despite the well-known impacts, • Aquaculture is also linked to severe biodiversity
bottom trawling remains one of the most common impacts, including coastal habitat destruction
fishing practices, in particular as fishing efforts via both waste disposal and introduction of alien
move further offshore and to deeper waters due to invasive species and pathogens. Aquaculture also
the overfishing of continental shelves.68 The impact contributes to further depletion of fisheries stocks,
on the seabed is particularly severe. It has been cal- due to the large fish meal and fish oil requirements
culated that the sediment mass that is resuspended used for feed. These effects are species dependent.
(or stirred up) by bottom-trawling is approximately For instance, shrimp and salmon farming have net
FIGURE 11: TOP IMPORTERS OF FISH PRODUCTS (2018, MILLION USD)55
the same amount of all sediment being deposited on negative effects, while carp and mollusc farming
the world’s continental shelves by rivers each year.69 have net positive effects on global fish supply and
food security.75 There have also been instances of
deforestation, particular in mangrove forests for the
establishment of aquaculture industries.76
SPAIN
8,500
ITALY JAPAN
7,100 13,900
The footprint of industrial fishing covers more than
USA
20,800 55 per cent of ocean areas.
CHINA
14,400
48 49
4.1. FOOD SYSTEM FISHERIES & AGRICULTURE BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 26 =====
Agriculture
Industry Scope
Every day, agriculture produces an average of of them provide the vast majority of the global output
23.7 million tons of food, provides livelihoods for 2.5 for meat, milk, and eggs.81
billion people, and is the largest source of income The agriculture and farming sector is by far the
and jobs for poor, rural households. In developing most important employer globally. It was estimated
countries, agriculture accounts for 65 per cent of all that more than 1.3 billion people make their income
jobs.78 Dependence upon a functioning ecosystem is from this sector, more than half of the world’s labour
the foundation of agriculture. Therefore, biodiversity force.82 There are more than 570 million farms world-
and the food economy are highly interrelated. For wide, but the vast majority are small with less than
instance, services providing bees and other insects a hectare of land. These small farms control only 8
that pollinate crops are estimated to be worth more per cent of all agricultural land, while the 1 per cent
than USD 200 billion per year.79 of farms that are larger than 50 hectares control 65
Yet when it comes to the production of food, per cent of the world’s agricultural land.83
species diversity has largely been lost. There are Agriculture is one of the largest contributors
around 6,000 plant species cultivated for food around to global biodiversity loss.84 Considering that at the
the world. Fewer than 200 contribute substantially current rate of consumption and population growth
to global food output, and only nine account for 66 the world will need to raise its food production by 60
per cent of total crop production (sugar cane, maize, to 70 per cent to feed more than nine billion people
rice, wheat, potatoes, soybeans, oil-palm fruit, sugar by 2050,85 radical changes in the food system will
beet and cassava).80 Similarly, livestock production is be necessary to address its effects on biodiversity.
based on about 40 animal species but only a handful
Agriculture is one of the largest contributors to global
biodiversity loss.
50 51
4.1 FOOD SYSTEM FISHERIES & AGRICULTURE BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 27 =====
FIGURE 12: TOP EXPORTERS OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS (2018, MILLION USD)77
Biodiversity impacts
Agriculture destroys biodiversity by driving the 10 per cent of the earth’s land surface, tropical forests
conversion of natural habitats to intensely managed support most of world’s terrestrial biodiversity102 and
systems and by releasing pollutants, including the current mass extinction of biodiversity largely
NETHERLANDS
65,500 GERMANY greenhouses gases. Food value chains further plays out in these ecosystems.103 Commodity-driven
51,200 impact biodiversity through energy use, transport, agriculture is responsible for more than a quarter of
and waste86 as well as by supporting industries like global forest loss104 and most agriculture in the trop-
CHINA
USA 53,900 packaging. In 2017, agriculture used 37 per cent of ics comes at the expense of intact forests.105
124,000 global land area. Regionally, this ranged from more - The total area covered by palm oil (Elaeis guineen-
than half of all land in Asia, to less than a quarter in sis) plantations is estimated to be around 18 million
Europe. Twenty countries contributed to more than hectares,106 an area larger than Switzerland, the
70 per cent of total arable land (cropland used for Netherlands, Denmark, and Belgium combined.
annual crops such as cereals and soybeans). India, Much of the rapid development of oil palm planta-
the United States of America, the Russian Federa- tions has been at the expense of tropical forests.
tion, China and Brazil combined accounted for 40 One study found that more than 50 per cent of Indo-
per cent of agricultural land area.87 If current trends nesian and Malaysian oil palm expansion between
BRAZIL
86,900 continue, the global calorific demand will increase 1990 and 2005 took place on forested land.107
by 70 per cent in 2050, and crop demand for human - Soy has been linked to deforestation and land-
consumption and animal feed will increase by at least use change in the Amazon and in dry forests and
100 per cent.88 This will further increase pressure on savannas of South America such as the Grand
ecosystems and biodiversity. Chaco and the Cerrado. However, beef production
is still currently considered the largest driver of
Pesticides deforestation in tropical forests. It is responsible
Pesticides can have devastating effects on for more than double the forest conversion gener-
biodiversity and their impacts have been widespread ated by the production of soy, palm oil, and wood
and persistent. For instance, even though DDT was products combined.108
banned decades ago, it is still found in penguins in
Total trade value: 1,200,000 Antarctica.89 Most of the pesticides that are applied
do not reach their targets. Only about 50 per cent of
Example: Impacts
pesticides reach target crops when applied through
aerial spraying, and a much smaller quantity reaches
of Neonicotinoid
target pests. It has been estimated that less than 0.1
per cent of all applied pesticides reach the target
Pesticides (or neonics)
organisms and more than 99 per cent of applied
pesticide impacts non-target organisms.90 As a result
on Pollinators
FIGURE 13: TOP IMPORTERS OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS (2018, MILLION USD)77
of their widespread use, agriculture chemicals can
also lead to a decline in beneficial predators91 and
to long-term change of habitats and the food chain.92 Neonicotinoid pesticides are known to
have sub-lethal effects on bees’ foraging and
Chemical Fertilisers colony performance and are thereby implicated
NETHERLANDS The excessive use of chemical fertilisers can in the global decline of bee populations.93 This
52,100 GERMANY JAPAN also have unintended consequences on nature can have severe impacts on food production
75,800
50,000
including direct toxicity to organisms from nitrogen, since many staple crops are reliant on pollinators
oxygen depletion in aquatic ecosystems, soil and such as bees, and some countries including
USA
CHINA water acidification, and the intensification of impacts the European Union have implemented various
100,000
137,000 from pathogens, invasive species, and climate bans on outdoor use of three of the most widely
change.100 Eutrophication (an excess in nutrients used neonicotinoids.94 Pesticides that end
caused by run-off from agricultural fertilisers into up in waterways have been shown to reduce
waterways) is not just a problem for inland waters biodiversity richness of invertebrates by up to
but also for marine environments. Sixteen per cent 42 per cent.95 Glyphosate, the most extensively
of marine ecosystems evaluated are in the high or used pesticide in the world, is increasingly linked
highest risk categories for coastal eutrophication.101 to negative biodiversity impacts96, 97, 98 despite
manufacturers’ claims of environmental ben-
Deforestation efits.99 It is now also banned or being phased
Another area with particularly visible biodiversity out in a small number of countries but, as is the
impacts caused by agriculture is the conversion of case with neonics, the use of these chemicals
pristine forests, especially tropical forests, to pasture, is still legal in most jurisdictions.
oil palm, and soy plantations. Despite covering only
52 53
4.1. FOOD SYSTEM FISHERIES & AGRICULTBUARNEKROLLING EXTINCTION BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 28 =====
dooW
,yrtseroF
2.4
doof-noN
&
stcudorP
seitidommoC
tseroF
FIGURE 14: TEN BANKS WITH LARGEST FINANCE AT RISK IN
Results
THE FORESTRY SECTOR (2019, MILLION USD)
6,000
Bank loans are at risk of driving biodiversity loss
directly through funding of forestry companies, but
5,000
also indirectly through financing industries along the 39%
supply chain such as paper packaging, construction
materials, or furniture. While forestry and wood prod- 4,000
ucts saw the least amount of investment amongst
the seven drivers of biodiversity loss included in this 3,000
research, forests are the most biodiverse ecosys-
tems on the planet and represent a crucial point of 2,000
intervention to address the global biodiversity crisis.
American banks are amongst the top lenders in
1,000
the forestry sector, however there is a much stronger
representation of Asian banks in the top ten, with 61%
0
Japanese Mizhuo Financial Group and the Sumitomo
TOTAL LOANS OF ALL 50 BANKS:
Mitsui Banking Corporation Group (SMBC) included.
USD 52 BILLION
The more than USD 52 billion in investments iden-
tified as being linked to the forest sector were split
nearly evenly between direct and indirect biodiversity
impact risks.
TOP TEN BANKS
Of particular note is that Indonesian Bank
Mandiri, Brazilian Banco do Brazil, and Malaysian
Malayan Banking are some of the largest investors
PAPER PAPER HOME FOREST & WOOD
REST OTHER
compared to their total assets. This is consistent PRODUCTS PACKAGING IMPROVEMENT PRODUCTS
with the importance of the forest and wood products PRODUCTS
sectors in these geographic regions.
Industry Scope
While forests cover around 31 per cent of the
global landmass, half of all forests are found in only
five countries: Brazil, Canada, China, Russian Feder-
ation, and the United States of America.110 Each year,
wood valued at over USD 100 billion is removed from
forests globally, mainly accounted for by industrial
roundwood. Approximately 10 million people are
employed in the forestry sector, with the livelihoods
of many more dependent on forests.111
The global forestry and logging products market
alone reached a value of nearly USD 510 billion in
2019112 and the paper and pulp market was valued
at USD 519 billion.113 In 2018, global industrial
roundwood (including pulpwood, saw logs and
veneer logs from both natural and plantation forest)
removals grew by 5 per cent to reach a record level
of 2.03 billion m³. Nearly as much wood is used for
cooking, heating, and power generation as is used
for industrial roundwood. In 2018, global wood fuel
removals amounted to 1,943 million m³. Further
down the supply chain, 409 million tonnes of paper
and paperboard and 408 million m³ of wood-based
panels were produced in 2019.114
In addition to the logging and harvesting of tim-
ber, the forestry sector also has significant links and
downstream connections along global value chains,
such as to the paper and packaging industry, as well
as building and infrastructure activities.
54 55
4.2 FORESTRY, WOOD PRODUCTS & NON-FOOD FOREST COMMODITIES BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 29 =====
FIGURE 15: INVESTMENTS IN THE FORESTRY AND WOOD PRODUCTS SECTOR IN 2019 AS A PERCENTAGE OF THEIR TOTAL ASSETS
Banco do Bank Goldman Rabobank JPMorgan ING
Sachs Chase Group
Brasil Mandiri 0.16%
0.16% 0.14% 0.12%
0.30% 0.21%
Toronto- NatWest Bradesco Royal Bank
SMBC Dominion of Canada
0.11% 0.11%
Bank
0.10%
Group
0.12%
0.20%
Bank of UniCredit
Santander Malayan Banking DBS
Citigroup 0.10% 0.09% 0.08% 0.07%
America
0.12%
0.24%
Wells Fargo
Deutsche Bank Standard Crédit Lloyds
0.19% 0.06% Bank Agricole Banking
Group
HSBC Oversea- 0.05% 0.04%
0.04%
Chinese
0.11% Banking
Corporation
Mizuho
Bank of Other
0.09% Banco Bilbao
China
Vizcaya
0.04%
Financial Argentaria
(BBVA)
Credit
0.06%
0.22% Barclays BNP
Suisse Paribas
0.11% Mitsubishi UFJ UBS
0.09%
Financial 0.04%
0.16%
0.06%
56 57
4.2 FORESTRY, WOOD PRODUCTS & NON-FOOD FOREST COMMODITIES BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 30 =====
FIGURE 16: TOP EXPORTERS OF FORESTRY PRODUCTS (2018, MILLION USD)109
Biodiversity impacts
CANADA
15,800 While the amount of finance provided to the human-wildlife conflicts such as hunting and poach-
RUSSIA
11,400 forestry, wood products, and non-food forest com- ing as new logging roads extend into previously
modity sector is comparatively small, the biodiversity unlogged areas. Illegal and unregulated logging can
GERMANY
8,500 impacts can be severe. Forests are home to most be of particular concern since it often takes place
of Earth’s terrestrial biodiversity and provide habitat in protected areas. According to some estimates,
for 80 per cent of amphibian species, 75 per cent of logging in violation of national laws accounts for 8 to
USA bird species, and 68 per cent of mammal species. 10 per cent of global production and trade in forest
16,600 The concentration of biodiversity varies according products. It also represents 40 to 50 per cent of all
to factors such as forest type, geography, climate, logging in some of the most valuable and threatened
and soils.115 forests on earth.121
Forests also provide ecosystem services that Clear-felling of natural forests (the removal of
are essential for human wellbeing116 such as provision almost all trees) has such severe effects on biodi-
of water, mitigation of climate change, regulation of versity that many countries have now abandoned the
local and regional weather patterns, and habitats practice.122 Even selective logging and reduced-im-
for many pollinators. Three-quarters of the world’s pact logging, which became popular in the 1990s
BRAZIL
14,600 leading food crops benefit from animal pollination as an alternative to clear-felling, have been shown
for fruit, vegetable, or seed production. In addition, to impact biodiversity through forest degradation.
nearly 30,000 plant species have been recorded as Scientists discovered that “selective logging, unless
being of medicinal use. Many of them are found in it is practiced at very low harvest intensities, can sig-
forest ecosystems.117 nificantly reduce the biomass of a tropical forest for
It is estimated that some 420 million hectares many decades, seriously diminishing aboveground
of forest have been lost through conversion to other carbon storage capacity, and create opportunities
land uses since 1990,118 equivalent to the size of the for weeds and vines to spread and slow down the
entire European Union.119 Although the rate of defor- ecological succession.”123
estation has decreased over the past three decades, On the Red List of Threatened Species by
in each of the last five years 10 million hectares of the International Union for Conservation of Nature
Total trade value: 178,000 forest were lost.120 Agricultural expansion is the pri- (IUCN), 8 per cent of assessed forest plants, 5 per
mary driver of deforestation and has been included in cent of forest animals, and 5 per cent of fungi found
the chapter on the food system, but logging for paper in forests are currently listed as critically endangered.
and wood products continues to be a contributor to More than 1,400 tree species are also considered
forest loss. critically endangered.124
All forestry activities in natural forests have some The role forests play in the protection of bio-
impact on biodiversity, but the extent and severity diversity and the regulation of the global and local
of these impacts vary substantially between forest climate is so important that many companies have
FIGURE 17: TOP IMPORTERS OF FORESTRY PRODUCTS (2018, MILLION USD)109
management types. The removal of forest cover can now adopted policies to remove deforestation of
result in wildlife losing their shelter, food sources, and natural forests from their supply chain altogether.125
migration routes, and becoming more vulnerable to
GERMANY It is estimated that some 420 million hectares of
10,400
ITALY JAPAN
6,800 9,600 forest have been lost through conversion to other
USA
13,900 CHINA land uses since 1990,118 equivalent to the size of the
44,700
entire European Union.
58 59
4.2 FORESTRY, WOOD PRODUCTS & NON-FOOBDA NFKORROESLLTI NCGO MEXMTOINDCITTIEIOSN BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 31 =====
rof
gniniM
3.4
slareniM
&
slateM
FIGURE 18: TEN BANKS WITH LARGEST FINANCE AT RISK IN
Results
THE MINING SECTOR (2019, MILLION USD)
70,000
Mining for metals and minerals is a driver
Many low and
of biodiversity loss that permeates many human
60,000
economic activities, especially when the down- 43%
middle-income
stream value chain is included. As a result, a large 50,000
number of industry sectors have been associated
economies
with mining in the methodology applied in this 40,000
report. Aside from immediate impacts on forests
remain
or water from extraction activities, our demand 30,000
for food, cars, planes, machinery, and electronics
dependent on
20,000
all fuel the global demand for mining products.
The majority of loans and finance with biodiversity
the mineral 10,000
risk is linked to these indirect industries, rather
57%
than the production of unprocessed metals and
sector. 0
minerals.
TOTAL LOANS OF ALL 50 BANKS:
The top ten banks at risk of financing biodiversity
USD 770 BILLION
loss through links to the wider mining sector are the
same that can be found in the forest sector, with the
exception of Goldman Sachs which replaced Bar-
clays. The diversity of the sector is also illustrated
by the fact the borrowing companies have been
AUTO & TRUCK INDUSTRIAL MACHINERY DIVERSIFIED
identified in 67 countries. TOP TEN BANKS MANUFACTURERS & EQUIPMENT IRON & STEEL MINING
The six banks with the largest proportion of
investment in the mining sector compared to their
SPECIALTY
REST GOLD OTHER
overall assets were all American and Japanese. MINING & METALS
Industry Scope
Metals are classified into two categories, geographically concentrated in Kazakhstan and
precious and industrial. Precious metals, including southern Africa, and half of all cobalt reserves can
gold, platinum, palladium, and silver, are also used in be found in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.131
industrial and manufacturing processes. Palladium is Mining plays a dominant role in 81 countries that col-
now considered the most valuable of the four major lectively account for a quarter of world GDP, half of the
precious metals and 85 per cent of palladium ends world’s population, and nearly 70 per cent of those
up in exhaust systems for cars.127 Gold is widely in extreme poverty. As a result, a growing number of
found in electronics in addition to jewellery, and silver low-income countries focus on resource extraction
is commonly used in electrical applications, solar and processing activities as fundamental to their
panels, and the automotive industry. economic growth plans.132 Many low and middle-in-
Copper, aluminium, steel, and zinc are amongst come economies remain dependent on the mineral
the most important base metals128 that make up the sector, and the governance of natural resources in
majority of metal use. The construction industry many of these countries is often weak, poor, or failing.
accounts for the largest revenue share of base metals Amongst the ten countries most dependent on min-
with 40 per cent of the total, followed by the automo- ing as a contributor to their economies are Suriname,
tive industry, consumer products, and the electrical Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Burkina
and electronics sector. Faso, Kyrgyz Republic, Mali, Sierra Leone, Liberia,
In 2018, the global base metal mining market Ghana, and Uzbekistan.133 China plays a particularly
size was valued USD 325 billion,129 while the value important role in the global market. The World Bank
of the precious metal market has been estimated at has found that for many of the metals needed in a
around USD 180 billion.130 Metal reserves are often carbon-constrained future, China enjoys a “global
highly geographically concentrated. For instance, dominance” for both production and reserves.134
95 per cent of the world’s chromium resources are
60 61
4.3 MINING FOR METALS & MINERALS BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 32 =====
FIGURE 19: INVESTMENTS IN THE MINING SECTOR IN 2019 AS A PERCENTAGE OF THEIR TOTAL ASSETS
Goldman Mizuho Barclays Morgan BNP Paribas Deutsche
Stanley Bank
Sachs Financial 1.90% 1.78%
1.86% 1.67%
3.01% 2.49%
Wells Fargo ING Group Credit HSBC Société
Générale
Suisse
1.62% 1.47% 1.39%
1.22%
SMBC
1.41%
Group
Bank of
America 2.01%
Royal Bank
Mitsubishi UBS Santander Natwest Bank of
China
0.86% 0.79% 0.75%
of Canada UFJ Financial
2.74%
0.73%
1.21%
1.54%
JPMorgan
Chase
Malayan BPCE Intesa Bank FirstRand
UniCredit Banking Group Sanpaolo Mandiri 0.39%
Toronto-
0.63% 0.49% 0.42% 0.42%
1.95%
Dominion
1.52%
Citigroup Bank
Other
1.17%
2.68% Oversea-
CIMB Chinese
DBS Group Banking
Corporation
0.50%
0.48%
Banco Bilbao
Crédit
1.90%
Vizcaya
Agricole
Argentaria
1.15% Standard China
(BBVA)
Bank Construction
Bank
1.48% 0.49%
0.43%
62 63
4.3 MINING FOR METALS & MINERALS BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 33 =====
FIGURE 20: TOP EXPORTERS OF MINING AND MINERALS PRODUCTS (2018, MILLION USD)126
Biodiversity impacts
Direct impacts on biodiversity from the mining One year later, of the extent of the disaster is still
of metals include the clearing of native vegetation uncertain. There is evidence that the 7000 km2 of
with follow-on effects such as soil erosion, siltation toxic plume has reached important biodiversity
GERMANY
70,300 SWITZERLAND and pollution of waterways, and the introduction of conservation areas in the Atlantic Ocean, including
65,600 weeds and invasive species, pests, and diseases of Abrolhos National Park, one of the most emblematic
native flora and fauna.135 protected areas in Brazil, and three other marine
CHINA
USA 86,200 • Habitat loss and fragmentation can also occur136 protected areas.” The annual loss of environmental
72,500 and is often linked to deforestation with associated services has been estimated at more than half a
impacts on biodiversity. Analysis by the Food and billion dollars.141 In the year 2000, a tailing dam from
Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO) a gold mine in Romania burst, spilling cyanide-laced
estimated that 44 per cent of all operational large- water into the Tisza and Danube rivers and killing up
scale mines were located in forests (more than 1,500 to 80 per cent of aquatic life along some stretches.142
mines). A further 1,800 mines located in forests were In the past 50 years, 63 major tailing-dam failures
in development or currently non-operational. Most have been reported worldwide.143 Impacts are not
AUSTRALIA of the mines are open-pit mines which have the limited to large mining operations. Artisanal and
92,400 largest environmental impacts.137 When combining small-scale goldmining is the leading source of
mines that are operational and in development, anthropogenic mercury emissions globally.144
nearly a third of all forests are potentially impacted • Deep-sea mining: The removal of minerals from
by largescale mining projects, with gold, iron ore, deep sea ocean floors is an emerging threat to
and copper being the main metals sourced in for- marine ecosystems. As of May 2018, more than
ests.138 This is of particular concern since metal-rich 1.5 million km2 of international seabed has been
regions often host plants with restricted geographic set aside for mineral exploration in the Pacific
distribution that can be of exceptional evolutionary and Indian oceans, and along the Mid-Atlantic
value. Research found that surface mining can drive Ridge. The IUCN expects commercial deep-sea
such rare and localised plants to extinction.139 mining to commence in the national waters of Papua
• Infrastructure: developments enabling mines can New Guinea in 2020. Mining in international waters
Total trade value: 1,500,000 also negatively affect biodiversity. Researchers is expected to commence in 2025.145 While the
found that in the Amazon, mining increased forest exact impacts cannot yet be predicted, scientists
loss up to 70 kilometres beyond mining lease concluded it is impossible for the industry to operate
boundaries, causing 11,670 km² of deforestation without significant impact. Most deep-sea ecosys-
between 2005 and 2015. This extent represents 9 tems targeted for mining are particularly vulnerable
per cent of all Amazon forest loss during this time since they are often pristine, diverse, dominated by
and 12 times more deforestation than occurred rare species, and very slow to recover. Predicted
within mining leases alone.140 direct impacts include organism removal at mine
FIGURE 21: TOP IMPORTERS OF MINING AND MINERALS PRODUCTS (2018, MILLION USD)126 • Water scarcity and quality: Most large-scale sites as well as habitat loss, fragmentation, and
mines produce large amounts of waste and billions modification through altered mineral and sedi-
of tonnes of mine tailings (mud-like, toxic waste ment composition. Indirect impacts include the
material) are accumulated every year around the smothering of habitat and biota, interference with
world. The accidental release of mine tailings can feeding activities, and the release and spread of
GERMANY have catastrophic biodiversity impacts, in particular nutrient-rich and toxin-laden water from the gener-
87,900 SWITZERLAND CHINA on aquatic ecosystems. Failures of tailing dams ation of plumes.146 In response to suggestions that
74,500 270,000
are not isolated events. In November 2015, a large impacts could be offset out-of-kind, for example by
mine-tailing dam owned by Samarco Corporation restoring coral reefs in exchange for loss of deep-
USA
collapsed in Brazil. Researchers described the sea biodiversity, some scientists argued that “the
97,600
event as “generating a massive wave of toxic mud relationship between any gain in biodiversity in an
INDIA that spread down the Doce River, killing 20 people, out-of-kind setting and loss of biodiversity in the
65,600 and affecting biodiversity across hundreds of kilo- deep sea is so ambiguous as to be scientifically
metres of river, riparian lands, and Atlantic coast. meaningless.”147
64 65
4.3 MINING FOR METALS & MINERALS BANKROLLING EXTINCTION BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 34 =====
sleuF
lissoF
4.4
The extraction, processing, and production Results
separately. This is mainly due to the significant atten-
of fossil fuels impact biodiversity both tion it receives from the companies that operate in it
Just like mining products, fossil fuels still as well as from the finance community. As a result,
directly through habitat loss and pollution underpin human societies to a vast extent. Nearly more banks have developed policies to limit their
all production, processing, and trade of goods is investments in the most carbon-intensive production
and indirectly through climate change dependent on the availability of hydrocarbons as methods and use.
energy, automotive and aviation fuel, or ingredients The scope of the industry is immense. Fossil
and by increasing accessibility to remote, for chemicals and plastics. Amongst the industry fuels still provide around 80 per cent of the world’s
sectors identified as most directly linked to fossil primary energy and sustain the political economy of
biodiverse ecosystems. fuels, exploration, production, and refining activities dozens of countries. The companies that supply and
have seen by far the largest investments that are at use fossil fuels make up a quarter of the global stock
risk of causing biodiversity loss. This contrasts with market and half the corporate bond market.149 The
most other drivers of biodiversity loss, where loans corresponding value of assets within the industry is
tend to favour industries along the supply chain rather also enormous. The three main assets are the 900
than primary industries. billion tonnes of coal, oil and gas, valued by the World
While the top two recipients of loans (Occidental Bank at USD 39 trillion, the supply infrastructure
Petroleum Corporation and the Saudi Arabian Oil worth USD 10 trillion, and the demand infrastructure
Company) are traditional oil and gas companies, the (electricity, transport, and heavy industry) valued at
top ten borrowers also included companies focusing USD 22 trillion.150
on oil and gas trading and transportation as well plas- Even though the overall number of participants
tics manufacturers. The top ten lenders were linked in the fossil fuel value chain might be large, 63 per
to 57 per cent of all loans identified in this sector. cent of cumulative worldwide emissions of industrial
The four largest investors in fossil fuel sectors CO and methane between 1751 and 2010 have
2
with risk are all from the USA and the six banks that been traced to only 90 “carbon major” entities. This
have the highest ratio of investments to total assets includes 56 crude oil and natural gas producers, 37
are all located in the USA and Canada, perhaps an coal extractors (including subsidiaries of oil and gas
indicator of their continuous role in the global fossil companies), and seven cement producers.151
fuel economy. Global proven reserves of fossil fuels stand at
1,700 billion barrels of oil, 220 trillion cubic metres
of natural gas, and 650 billion tonnes of coal.152 With
Industry Scope
85 per cent of the world’s CO emissions coming
2
from fossil fuel combustion,153 dependency on fossil
While the global assessment report by the fuels and the biodiversity impacts from global climate
IPBES includes fossil fuels in mining as a driver for change are set to continue for many years to come.
biodiversity loss, in this document the sector is listed
FIGURE 22: TEN BANKS WITH LARGEST FINANCE AT RISK IN
THE FOSSIL FUEL SECTOR (2019, MILLION USD)
40,000
35,000
44%
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
56%
0
TOTAL LOANS OF ALL 50 BANKS:
USD 430 BILLION
OIL & GAS EXPLORATION OIL & GAS REFINING INTEGRATED OIL RELATED
TOP TEN BANKS
& PRODUCTION & MARKETING OIL & GAS SERVICES &
EQUIPMENT
66 REST OIL & GAS TRANSPORTATION OTHER 67
4.4 FOSSIL FUELS SERVICES BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 35 =====
FIGURE 23: INVESTMENTS IN THE FOSSIL FUELS SECTOR IN 2019 AS A PERCENTAGE OF THEIR TOTAL ASSETS
Goldman Wells Fargo Royal Bank CIMB Group Mizuho
Sachs of Canada Financial
1.34% 1.23%
1.93% 1.33% 1.21%
Toronto- Barclays ING Group Société DBS
Dominion Bank Générale
1.01% 0.87% 0.74%
Citigroup
1.21% 0.79%
1.71%
Mitsubishi BNP Paribas UniCredit Rabobank
Deutsche
SMBC Group UFJ Financial
Bank 0.63% 0.60% 0.55%
0.66%
1.11% 0.73%
Morgan
UBS FirstRand Commonwealth Santander State Bank
Bank of of India
Stanley 0.43% 0.32%
0.52% Australia
Banco 0.31%
Credit Suisse
0.32%
Bilbao
1.56%
Vizcaya
1.09%
Argentaria Bank of National Australia NatWest
China
Bank
(BBVA) 0.19%
Crédit Oversea- 0.31% 0.25%
Chinese
0.70% Agricole
Banking
Bank of 0.50% Corporation Other
0.43% BPCE Group
HSBC
JPMorgan
0.28%
America
0.67%
Chase
Bank
Malayan
1.45% 1.06% Mandiri Banking Standard
0.33% Bank
0.45%
0.26%
68 69
4.4 FOSSIL FUELS BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 36 =====
FIGURE 24: TOP EXPORTERS OF FOSSIL FUELS PRODUCTS (2018, MILLION USD)148
Biodiversity impacts
CANADA
98,700 RUSSIA
272,000 The extraction, processing, and productionof and a third of resident orca whales were killed in
fossil fuels impact biodiversity directly through habi- the immediate aftermath but effects on wildlife
Exploration,
tat loss and pollution, and indirectly through climate continued for decades, sometimes outweighing the
change and increasing accessibility to remote, bio- acute mortality from the spill event.159
production,
diverse ecosystems. Oil spill accidents are not limited to fossil fuel trans-
USA UAE and refining • Exploration: Even prior to extracting fossil fuels, portation. The oil leak from the Deepwater Horizon
197,000 the exploration process can impact biodiversity drilling rig is considered to be the largest marine
SAUDI ARABIA 203,000
through habitat conversion and noise pollution from oil spill in the history of the petroleum industry.
212,000 activities have
drilling exploratory wells and surveying. Noise from Nearly 800 million litres of oil were released into
seismic marine surveys have been associated with the Gulf of Mexico over 87 days in 2010, covering
seen by far
impacts on many marine taxa including mammals, an area of 150,000 km2. Thousands of protected
crustaceans, cephalopods, and fish. In some cases, species including turtles, dolphins, and whales
the largest
whale sightings in areas where seismic survey take were exposed and oil-associated health effects of
place were found to decrease by 90 per cent for some turtle species lead to a 50 per cent decline in
investments
some species.154 their population.160
• Extraction: Effects from the extraction of fossil fuels • Climate Change: The most significant indirect
that are at risk
include local habitat destruction and fragmentation, impact on biodiversity from fossil fuel extraction is
visual and noise disturbance, and pollution. Indirect contribution to climate change. There is consen-
of causing
effects can be measured many kilometres from the sus among scientists that climate change already
extraction source and include human expansion affects biodiversity and is likely to become one of
biodiversity loss.
into previously wild areas, increasing access for the most significant drivers of biodiversity loss by
loggers, the introduction of invasive species and the end of the century.161 Impacts include the loss
pathogens, soil erosion, water pollution, and illegal or degradation of habitat, changes in temperature
hunting.155 Biodiversity impacts from fossil fuel or water availability outside of tolerable thresholds,
extraction can extend beyond terrestrial organisms the loss of important interactions between species,
Total trade value: 2,700,000 and also affect below-ground species and freshwa- and the arrival of new diseases.162
ter and marine ecosystems. Even the distribution, - Broader climate change impacts on biodiversity,
refining, and use of fossil fuels have direct biodiver- identified in the fifth assessment of the IPCC,
sity impacts such as habitat destruction associated include coral bleaching, an increase of hypoxic
with infrastructure development and pollution.156 areas (“dead zones”), and changes in species
The direct biodiversity impacts of hydrocarbon distribution in oceanic ecosystems. In terrestrial
extraction are often exacerbated since oil and gas ecosystems, the increases in wildfires are especially
infrastructure tends to be located where species noticeable in the Amazon and forests of Southeast
FIGURE 25: TOP IMPORTERS OF FOSSIL FUELS PRODUCTS (2018, MILLION USD)148
richness is high. In the sea, exploitation is generally Asia during the annual fires season, but changes
located close to the coast, and continental shelves in air temperature can also lead to increased tree
tend to be more biodiverse than the open ocean.157 mortality. Temperature increases of about 1.4° or
It has been estimated USD 3 to 15 trillion worth of more can result in abrupt and irreversible changes in
unexploited hydrocarbon reserves are located in the appearance and functioning of ecosystems.163
marine and terrestrial protected areas which could The distribution of nearly half (47 per cent) of land-
CHINA come under pressure of development.158 based flightless mammals, and almost a quarter of
JAPAN
338,000 141,000 • O il Spills: Some of the most catastrophic direct threatened birds, may already have been negatively
impacts come from accidents such as oil spills. affected by climate change.164 Using average global
USA
No single event has tainted the industry as much warming forecasts, scientists have also predicted
223,000 SOUTH KOREA
as the 1989 Exxon Valdez accident which spilled climate change could result in the extinction of up
142,000
INDIA 42 million litres of crude oil over 26,000 km2 of to a third of species. Under more extreme warming
164,000
water in Alaska’s Prince William Sound. Hundreds scenarios, more than half of the species surveyed
of thousands of marine birds, thousands of otters, could be lost.165
70 71
4.4 FOSSIL FUELS BANKROLLING EXTINCTION BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 37 =====
erutcurtsarfnI
5.4
FIGURE 26: TEN BANKS WITH LARGEST FINANCE AT RISK IN
THE INFRASTRUCTURE SECTOR (2019, MILLION USD)
60,000
50,000
46%
40,000
30,000
20,000
10,000
54%
0
TOTAL LOANS OF ALL 50 BANKS:
USD 830 BILLION
OIL & GAS EXPLORATION MULTILINE INDUSTRIAL
TOP TEN BANKS ELECTRIC UTILITIES
AND PRODUCTION UTILITIES CONGLOMERATES
CONSTRUCTION
REST OTHER
& ENGINEERING
Results Industry Scope
Infrastructure has seen the largest investment Infrastructure is critical for economic and social
of all biodiversity-related sectors, followed by min- development and is required for most basic human
Key
ing and fossil fuels. One explanation for this is the needs such as access to water, power, and transport.
reliance on significant infrastructure investments Roads, railways, air and seaports are necessary for
infrastructure
by some industries that are also linked to other local, regional, and international movement of people
drivers of biodiversity loss, with the exploration and and goods. The Global Infrastructure Outlook argues
linked to
production as well as refining of fossil fuels being that by 2040, additional infrastructure worth USD 95
one example. The three largest industry activi- trillion will need to be built, comprised of USD 34
biodiversity
ties included in this driver of biodiversity loss are trillion for roads, USD 28 trillion for energy, USD 11
construction and engineering, electric utilities, and trillion for rail, USD 8.9 trillion for telecommunica-
impacts
industrial conglomerates. tions, USD 6.4 trillion for water, and USD 4.9 trillion
With more than USD 800 billion of loans and for airports and seaports.168
includes roads,
financing linked to direct and indirect biodiversity Key infrastructure linked to biodiversity impacts
impacts, this sector received the largest amount of includes roads, dams, and the production and use
dams, and the
funding, though the actual biodiversity impacts from of cement. While estimates vary when it comes to
the sector are much smaller than those caused by the total length of the global road network, recent
production and
the food production system for instance. studies state there are 21 million kilometres of roads
Of note here is that the Bank of China entered on the planet.169 An analysis on the Amazon found
use of cement
the list of the ten largest lenders who provide finance that deforestation was much higher near roads and
with risk of having biodiversity impacts. Amongst rivers than elsewhere in the region. Nearly 95 per cent
the largest borrowers of finance associated with of all deforestation occurred within 5.5 kilometres
infrastructure are companies operating in the fossil of roads or 1 kilometre of rivers.170 There are also
fuel sector, as well as large, international construction about 50,000 large dams (higher than 15 metres),
companies and corporations focusing on electric and an estimated 16.7 million reservoirs (larger than
utility infrastructure. 0.01 ha) hold approximately 8,070 km3.171 Many
Many companies related to fossil fuels can also large infrastructure projects rely on concrete for their
be found amongst the largest borrowers for loans construction, and the global production of concrete
linked to infrastructure, in addition to large, inter- is estimated to be around 12 billion tons per year.172
national construction companies and corporations The value of the ready-mix concrete market alone is
focusing on electric utility infrastructure. more than USD 650 billion and expected to rise to
USD 1.2 trillion by 2027.173
72 73
4.5 INFRASTRUCTURE BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 38 =====
FIGURE 27: INVESTMENTS IN THE INFRASTRUCTURE SECTOR IN 2019 AS A PERCENTAGE OF THEIR TOTAL ASSETS
Citigroup Goldman Wells Fargo SMBC Group JPMorgan CIMB Group
Chase
Sachs 2.11% 2.01% 1.88%
2.99%
1.97%
2.39%
Toronto- Mitsubishi UniCredit Banco Bilbao Société
Vizcaya Générale
Dominion UFJ
Barclays
1.30% Argentaria
Mizuho 1.26%
Bank Financial (BBVA)
2.33%
Financial 1.30%
1.84% 1.41%
2.82%
ING Group Bank of China Crédit HSBC
Agricole
DBS 1.15% 1.05% 1.04%
1.05%
1.61%
Credit Suisse
Morgan
Malayan Rabobank BPCE Group Standard
Deutsche
2.28% Banking Bank
Stanley 0.61% 0.60%
Bank
0.78% 0.51%
1.14%
2.72% Bank
UBS Banco do Intesa HDFC Bank
Mandiri Brasil Sanpaolo
0.50% 0.43%
0.47% 0.44%
Santander
NatWest
1.56%
0.76%
1.14%
Other
Royal Bank Bank of
State
Bank of
America
India
of Canada BNP
0.48%
2.23% Paribas Oversea-
2.70% Chinese Banking Bradesco
Corporation 0.66% Agricultural
1.55%
Bank of
1.12%
China
0.47%
74 75
4.5 INFRASTRUCTURE BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 39 =====
FIGURE 28: INFRASTRUCTURE EXPENDITURE NEEDED (2019, MILLION USD)166
Biodiversity impacts
Infrastructure projects can come with severe for spawning and feeding.181 This can even lead
direct and indirect impacts on biodiversity. directly to the extinction of genetically distinct
• Roads: Roads can have long-lasting biodiversity stocks or species.182
impacts since they open access to previously undis- Other impacts include the outright destruction of
turbed areas. This results in habitat fragmentation, biodiverse habitats through flooding. Dams can
deforestation, and reduced wildlife abundance also lead to river sediment starvation and ultimately
though disturbance, mortality (road kills), and over- coastal erosion in delta regions and estuaries with
JAPAN
3,800 hunting, particularly in tropical regions. Over the last negative consequences on habitats.183
few decades, studies in a variety of terrestrial and At least 3,700 major dams, each with a capacity of
USA
aquatic ecosystems have demonstrated that many more than 1MW, are either planned or under con-
12,000 CHINA
28,000 of the world’s most pervasive threats to biological struction, primarily in countries with emerging econ-
INDIA
diversity are directly or indirectly linked to roads.174 omies. While these dams are predicted to increase
4,500
Even though new roads have led to loss of forest, the present global hydroelectricity capacity by 73
such as in biodiverse tropical habitats across Latin per cent, they will reduce the number of remaining
America, some positive effects have been recorded free-flowing large rivers on the planet by about
in more highly-populated and developed areas such 21 per cent.184 Some of the dams that are planned
BRAZIL as within India.175 Nevertheless, some of the largest or already under construction are predicted to have
2,700 increases in road length are forecast for the most devastating impacts on biodiversity. For instance in
vulnerable and biodiverse regions on earth includ- Indonesia, China’s state-owned Sinohydro is build-
ing the Amazon, Congo Basin, and New Guinea.176 ing the Batang Toru dam and there are concerns
In the Congo Basin, unpaved logging roads used by it will flood and alter the habitat of the critically
timber firms, as well as paved and unpaved public endangered Tapanuli orangutan, of which less
roads, increased by 60 per cent between 2003 than 800 individuals remain, making it unlikely for
and 2018, and doubled within forest concessions. the species to survive.185 Both the World Bank and
Annual deforestation rates within 1 kilometre of the the International Finance Corporation have backed
roads increased markedly.177 In Europe, researchers out of funding the project due to the environmental
found that integrating roadless areas into biodiver- sensitivity of the area.186
sity conservation networks would be an important • Concrete: As the most-used construction material
contribution to achieve the goals of the European worldwide, concrete also has detrimental envi-
Union’s 2020 Biodiversity Strategy.178 ronmental impacts. The production of concrete is
• Hydropower: Hydropower is currently the largest responsible for 9 per cent of global industrial water
FIGURE 29: HYDROPOWER CAPACITY INSTALLED BY COUNTRY (2019,GW)167
renewable electricity source and is forecast to meet withdrawals and by 2050, 75 per cent of the water
16 per cent of global electricity demand by 2023.179 demand for concrete production will likely occur
Much of the electricity generated by hydropower in regions that are expected to experience water
CANADA comes from dams which are linked to biodiversity stress.187 The extraction of raw materials needed
81.4
impacts. The freshwater habitats in which dams are for concrete production (such as sand, gravel, and
located cover only about 0.8 per cent of Earth’s sur- limestone for cement) poses major risks to biodiver-
face, yet they host a disproportionately high diversity sity and ecosystems. These impacts can contribute
of species.180 to habitat degradation, fragmentation, and loss, and
One-third of the described vertebrates, including pose a significant risk to business operations.188
USA about 40 per cent of the fish species, are found in Production of cement (used as a binder in concrete)
102.8 CHINA freshwater environments. Damming rivers is one of is also responsible for up to 8 per cent of the world’s
356.4
the main threats to freshwater biodiversity through CO emissions,189 thereby contributing to biodiver-
INDIA 2
50.1 obstruction of migration routes which are essential sity impacts from climate change.
BRAZIL
109.1
76 77
4.5 INFRASTRUCTURE BANKROLLING EXTINCTION BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 40 =====
msiruoT
6.4
Results Industry Scope Tourism can contribute to scarce funds
for conservation and provide local
Amongst the seven human activities that drive Tourism is one of the world’s largest industries
global biodiveristy loss included in this analysis, and in 2019 it contributed about USD 9 trillion to
people with an economic incentive to
tourism receives the least amount of investment. the global economy and made up 10.3 per cent of
The Thomson Reuters Business classification global GDP.191 Its proportion of regional GDP was
protect biodiversity.
(TRBC) codes that can be linked to tourism are air- particularly high in the Caribbean, Southeast Asia,
lines, hotels, motels and cruise lines, and restaurants and Oceania. The World Travel and Tourism Council
and bars. These three sectors are nearly evenly split estimates that 330 million jobs are linked to tourism
in their loan contributions. It is likely that many of the around the world.192 Tourism has consistently grown
loans to tourism ventures with significant biodiversity for six decades and has become an important sector
impacts are provided by smaller, local banks and may globally and locally. It makes significant contributions
therefore be underestimated in this methodology. to job creation, export revenue, and domestic indus-
Furthermore, the structure of TRBC codes does not tries. In 2019, international tourist arrivals reached
lend itself well to identify economic activities linked 1.5 billion for the first time. Within OECD countries
to tourism. every tourism dollar spent by international visitors
With just under USD 65 billion of finance identi- generates 89 cents of domestic value more than
fied, companies linked to the tourism sector received overall exports.193 Tourism has become an increas-
the smallest amount of loans. One reason for this is ingly diversified phenomenon enabled by the trans-
the difficulty in matching areas of potential biodiver- formation of largely developed societies moving from
sity impacts with the relevant business codes. Fast economies based on production to those based on
food restaurant chains, cruise lines, and hotel chains services and consumption. Increases in paid holiday
were among the individual companies that received time for employees also enabled the global tourism
the largest loans. Of note is that a significant percent- industry.194 Tourism has been described as the largest
age of loans have the potential for direct impacts on scale movement of goods, services, and people that
biodiversity, while the top ten lenders remain largely humanity has ever seen.195
unchanged from previous sectors. Forty-seven per However, the sector has been hit particularly
cent of all loans identified as having biodiversity hard by the COVID-19 pandemic and with global
impact risk were linked to the top ten lenders. travel restrictions, it is predicted up to 100 million
tourism jobs could be at least temporarily lost.196
FIGURE 30: TEN BANKS WITH LARGEST FINANCE AT RISK IN
THE TOURISM SECTOR (2019, MILLION USD)
6,000
40% 5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
60%
1,000
TOTAL LOANS OF ALL 50 BANKS:
USD 64 BILLION
0
TOP TEN BANKS
HOTELS, MOTELS
REST AIRLINES RESTAURANTS & BARS
& CRUISE LINES
78 79
4.6 TOURISM BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 41 =====
FIGURE 31: INVESTMENTS IN THE TOURISM SECTOR IN 2019 AS A PERCENTAGE OF THEIR TOTAL ASSETS
Morgan Citigroup Credit BNP Paribas Barclays HSBC
Suisse
Stanley 0.18% 0.17% 0.16%
0.24%
0.18%
0.38%
Goldman Sachs DBS Société Deutsche Banco Bilbao
Vizcaya
Générale Bank
0.24% 0.16% Argentaria
(BBVA)
0.14% 0.14%
0.12%
Oversea-
Royal Bank SMBC Group NatWest Toronto-
of Canada Dominion
Chinese 0.09% 0.08%
Bank
0.11%
Banking Wells Fargo JPMorgan 0.07%
Chase
0.23%
Corporation
Santander UniCredit Rabobank Mitsubishi
UFJ
0.15% 0.07% 0.06% 0.05%
Financial
0.29%
0.05%
Mizuho
Financial
0.10%
Malayan UBS CIMB Other
Group
0.07%
Bank of America
Crédit
0.05%
Banking
Agricole
0.22%
ING Group
0.25%
0.14% 0.10%
BPCE Group
Crédit
0.07%
Mutuel CIC
Group
0.04%
80 81
4.6 TOURISM BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 42 =====
FIGURE 32: TOP SPENDERS IN INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (2018, MILLION USD)190
Biodiversity impacts
USA UNITED KINGDOM
186,500 69,000
Much of tourism is based on an appreciation of plastic waste in the ocean. In 2016, the company
of biodiversity and its role in the creation of national was also fined USD 40 million for what had been
parks and reserves, as well as in helping conserve described at the time as the “largest-ever criminal
GERMANY
mega-fauna.197 Tourism can have positive effects penalty involving deliberate vessel pollution.”208
104,200
for biodiversity and can reduce the impact on UNEP has identified tourist ships as one of the prin-
endangered species who tend to be valued higher cipal pollution sources of marine eco-systems.209
FRANCE CHINA in more affluent societies. It has been argued that Finally, CO2 emissions from tourism are a significant
58,000 277,300 a 10 per cent increase in income is able to mitigate contributor to climate change, thereby contributing
biodiversity loss linked to threatened species by 3 to biodiversity loss from climate change. A peer-re-
to 4 per cent.198 Tourism can contribute to scarce viewed study from 2018 estimates that 8 per cent of
funds for conservation and provide local people with global greenhouse gas emissions are linked to the
an economic incentive to protect biodiversity as well tourism sector, and in particular transport, shopping,
as provide an alternative to other, potentially more and food. Researchers found the rapid increase in
damaging forms for development.199 tourism demand is outstripping the decarbonization
However, tourism can also have negative of tourism-related technology.210
effects on the environment, and biodiversity loss in
particular.
Example: Coral Reefs/
• I nfrastructure: Infrastructure for tourism usually
requires significant tracts of land and building
Sunscreen
materials. Development can often take place in
an unplanned manner that completely and rapidly
transforms landscapes. Significant biodiversity loss One key area of biodiversity impact occurs
from deforestation and the draining of wetlands has in coral reefs which are amongst the most
been linked to the establishment of tourism ven- biodiverse ecosystems on the planet. Coral
tures, which is of particular concern, given tourism reef-linked tourism has been valued at USD
often occurs in fragile areas such as coastal zones, 36 billion a year,202 with recreational diving and
Total expenditure: 1,600,000 mountains and protected areas. Uncontrolled mass snorkelling on reefs one of the fastest growing
tourism has been identified as one of the root tourism sectors globally.
causes of coastal degradation. • Studies in Thailand found coral reefs at low-use
• Pollution: Littering and water pollution from tourism dive sites were twice as likely to be healthy
can also have negative consequences for biodiver- compared to high-use sites. There was a three-
sity conservation, especially in remote areas where fold increase in the presence of coral diseases
waste removal is logistically difficult. The depletion at high-use sites in addition to higher rates
of local resources provides additional pressure on of physical injuries and tissue necrosis from
FIGURE 33: TOP RECIPIENTS OF INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (2018, MILLION USD)190
biodiversity.200 sediments.203
• Invasive species: Since the 17th century, invasive • Corals are extremely sensitive to changes in
USA FRANCE
alien species have contributed to nearly 40 per temperature and changes in water quality.
256,100 73,100
cent of all animal extinctions for which the cause is Small increases in the supply of nutrients, for
known, and 480,000 species have been acciden- instance, can promote algal encroachment,
GERMANY tally or deliberately introduced to locations outside and enable algae to outcompete and kill
60,300 the natural limits of their geographic range. Tourism coral.204
contributes to this phenomenon.201 • Sunscreen from hundreds of thousands of
• Cruise Ships: ships are linked to direct biodiversity tourists that washes into the ocean has also
SPAIN impacts including transporting invasive species been linked to severe impacts on coral reefs.
813,000
into ports, affecting sensitive and endemic plants Two ingredients, oxybenzone and octinoxate,
THAILAND
and animals. Wildlife patterns can be changed as can be found in up to 80 per cent of sunscreens
65,200
animals are conditioned to come near approaching and also in a number of personal care products
cruise ships. Of the 109 countries globally with such as soaps, shampoos and insect repel-
coral reefs, almost half of them have seen damage lents. Studies have shown direct toxic effects
from cruise ship anchors, sewage dumping, tour- on corals.205
ists breaking off chunks of coral, and commercial • Thousands of tonnes of sunscreen is washed
harvesting for sale to tourists.207 Despite many juris- into the ocean every year. As result of these
dictions having strict legislation that prohibits the concerns, Hawaii has passed legislation to ban
dumping of waste, this is not always adhered to. In the two most common sunscreen ingredients
2019, Carnival Corporation agreed to a fine of USD from January 1, 2021.206
20 million for violations that included the dumping
82 83
4.6 TOURISM BANKROLLING EXTINCTION BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 43 =====
fo
tnemevoM
7.4
elpoeP
dna
sdooG
FIGURE 34: TEN BANKS WITH LARGEST FINANCE AT RISK
Food retail and distribution, ground
IN THE MOVEMENT OF GOODS AND PEOPLE SECTOR (2019,
MILLION USD)
freight and logistics, and oil and 20,000
gas transportation services are key
42%
15,000
industry activities which receive the
majority of loans under this driver of
10,000
biodiversity loss.
5,000
58%
0
TOTAL LOANS OF ALL 50 BANKS:
USD 175 BILLION
GROUND FREIGHT FOOD RETAIL & COURIER, POSTAL, AIR OIL & GAS
TOP TEN BANKS
& LOGISTICS DISTRIBUTION FREIGHT & LAND-BASED TRANSPORTATION
LOGISTICS SERVICES
REST AIRLINES OTHER
Results
Transporting goods from locations where they
are sourced to locations where they are demanded
Food retail and distribution, ground freight and links a company to its suppliers and customers, and
logistics, and oil and gas transportation services are also involves forecasting demand, planning inven-
key industry activities which receive the majority of tory, and storing goods.213 All industries depend on
loans under this driver of biodiversity loss. the logistics sector, which also affects important
The ten largest banks providing finance to this economic indicators such as rates of inflation, inter-
sector in both absolute and relative terms (as a est, productivity, and energy costs and availability.214
percentage of assets) are all headquartered in North Furthermore, the logistics industry provides signifi-
America and Europe. The banks accounted for 58 per cant macro-contributions to national economies by
cent of all loans linked to direct or indirect biodiversity creating employment, national income, and foreign
risks in this sector. investment. It also is a key industry in increasing the
competitive power of corporations.215
Evaluating the size of the global logistics market
Industry Scope
is dependent on the definitions used and the sector
is relatively ill-defined. Estimates range between USD
The transportation and logistics sectors are 5 trillion and USD 12 trillion.216,217 It has been argued
vital engines of global economies which depend that about 12 per cent of global GDP can be linked
on the largely uninhibited movement of people and to the logistics industry, with 43 per cent of industry’s
goods. Globalisation and the associated expansion value generated by the trucking sector, 22 per cent
of international trade, as well as complicated and by inventory carrying, and 11 per cent by logistics
fragmented supply chains, have made it essential administration. Just over 7 per cent of the total value
for countries to improve their logistics capacity.211 is linked to water transport, while air and rail transport
can claim about 3 per cent each.218
84 85
4.7 MOVEMENT OF GOODS AND PEOPLE BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 44 =====
FIGURE 35: INVESTMENTS IN THE LOGISTICS AND TRANSPORTATION SECTOR IN 2019 AS A PERCENTAGE OF THEIR TOTAL ASSETS
Morgan Bank of Barclays Toronto- JPMorgan Deutsche
Dominion Chase Bank
Stanley America 0.50%
Bank
0.41% 0.41%
1.11% 0.72%
0.44%
ING Mizuho Société BNP HSBC
Group Financial Générale Paribas
0.29%
0.38% 0.30% 0.30% 0.29%
Wells Fargo
Goldman
0.70%
Sachs
National DBS Banco Bilbao UniCredit NatWest
Vizcaya
Australia
0.19% Argentaria 0.19% 0.19%
0.93%
Royal Bank (BBVA)
0.19%
0.22%
Bank of
Canada
BPCE Group Rabobank Oversea- Crédit
0.37%
Chinese Mutuel
SMBC 0.18% 0.17%
Banking CIC
Group Corporation Group
0.12% 0.09%
Citigroup 0.21%
Credit Suisse
Other
Santander
0.60% UBS
0.84% 0.18%
0.37%
Crédit
Agricole
Mitsubishi UFJ
0.21%
Financial
0.17%
86 87
4.7 MOVEMENT OF GOODS AND PEOPLE BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 45 =====
FIGURE 36: TOP EXPORTERS OF GLOBAL COMMODITIES (2018, MILLION USD)212
Biodiversity impacts
CHINA
During the 20th century, links between trans- mammals and cause them to abandon their
2,494,230
portation and the environment emerged much more habitat, alter their behaviour, or mask their
strongly than before, particularly with the massive acoustic signals over large areas.223 Further-
GERMANY expansion of modes such as the automobile and air- more, dredging activities to enable transport
1,562,419 plane. At the same time, manufacturing and market- can modify the hydrology by creating turbidity
JAPAN ing concepts such as ‘planned obsolescence’ gen- that can affect marine biological diversity.
USA 738,201 erated the design of transported products, including - C ollisions: Collisions between ships and
1,665,303 automobiles, that could be continuously replaced. whales, other marine mammals, and turtles
The 1960s and 1970s were crucial decades in the are regularly reported globally. In some cases,
SOUTH KOREA realisation of the negative environmental impacts such as the North Atlantic right whale, this
604,807
of human activities and the need for regulations.219 can be a serious threat to the survival of the
• Non-terrestrial transport: Both airborne and sea- species. Even when the frequency of such
borne transportation of goods and people has risen collisions does not threaten the species at the
dramatically in recent years, causing increased population level, it can be a major cause of
pollution and a significant rise in invasive species.220 human-induced mortality.224
- Adverse effects: Adverse effects on biodiver-
sity from maritime transport include pollution • Terrestrial Transportation: Terrestrial transpor-
from chemicals that enter the marine envi- tation often requires draining land, thus reducing
ronment following collisions, groundings, or wetland areas and driving out water plant species.
other accidents. While less often documented, Roads and railway lines have restricted the growth
discharges from operational activities also of certain plants or produced changes in ecosys-
lead to adverse effects on marine habitats and tems with the introduction of new species. It has
species, as can damage from anchoring and also been argued that animal species are becoming
propeller scarring.221 In addition, waste gener- endangered because of changes in their natural
ated by the operations of vessels at sea or in habitats, including fragmentation resulting from
port can contain very high levels of bacteria transportation infrastructures. Toxic fuel and oil
Total trade value: 19,000,000 that can be hazardous for public health, as spills from motor vehicles are washed on roadsides
well as marine ecosystems, when discharged and contaminate the soil. Hazardous materials and
in waters.222 heavy metals have been found in areas contiguous
- N oise pollution: Maritime transport can to railroads, ports, and airports.225
affect marine mammals since they rely heavily
on sound to communicate, coordinate their Overall, the transport and logistics sector is
movements, navigate, exploit and investigate responsible for nearly a quarter of the total energy-re-
the environment, find prey, and avoid obsta- lated CO emissions, making it a major contributor
2
FIGURE 37: TOP IMPORTERS OF GLOBAL COMMODITIES (2018, MILLION USD)212
cles, predators or other hazards. Noise from to global warming and its biodiversity impacts. More
seismic surveys or construction works, such than 70 per cent of transport-related emissions orig-
USA as pile driving for port or bridge construction, inate from road transportation.226
2,611,432 CHINA
2,134,983 can severely interfere with the lives of marine
GERMANY
1,292,726 Overall, the transport and logistics sector is
JAPAN
748,218 responsible for nearly a quarter of the total energy-
UNITED KINGDOM
671,694 related CO emissions, making it a major contributor
2
to global warming and its biodiversity impacts
88 89
4.7 MOVEMENT OF GOODS AND PEOPLE BANKROLLING EXTINCTION BANKROLLING EXTINCTION
===== page 46 =====
5
Appendix:
Methodologies
Bankrolling
===== page 47 =====
5.1 Finance Calculation Methodology S& P GLOBAL BANK BANK COUNTRY REGION ASSETS (MILLLION USD)
The research to quantify the loans for each 5.1.1 Scope selection methodology 5.1.1.1. Banks selection 24 Lloyds Banking Group UK Europe 1,104,420
bank was carried out by Profundo. The names The research analyses financial flows pro- The 50 selected banks are active worldwide
of the banks and the business codes to include vided by 50 banks in the form of loans and and are part of the S&P Global 100 list or are 25 Toronto-Dominion Bank Canada North America 1,102,040
in the research were provided to Profundo by underwriting services to a selection of sectors significant due to operating in regions and
portfolio.earth. considered as having a substantial impact countries where biological diversity and activ- 27 Intesa Sanpaolo Italy Europe 1,057,820
on biodiversity. The banks and sectors ities impacting it is particularly pronounced.
selected for the analysis are detailed in the 28 Norinchukin Bank Japan Asia & Pacific 1,011,140
following sections.
29 ING Group Netherlands Europe 1,000,720
30 Goldman Sachs USA North America 992,970
32 Crédit Mutuel CIC Group France Europe 976,140
33 UBS Switzerland Europe 972,180
34 UniCredit Italy Europe 960,210
S& P GLOBAL BANK BANK COUNTRY REGION ASSETS (MILLLION USD)
36 NatWest UK Europe 957,600
1 Industrial and Commercial Bank of China China Asia & Pacific 4,324,270 39 Morgan Stanley USA North America 895,430
2 China Construction Bank China Asia & Pacific 3,653,110 41 Credit Suisse Switzerland Europe 812,910
3 Agricultural Bank of China China Asia & Pacific 3,572,980 42 Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria (BBVA) Spain Europe 782,160
4 Bank of China China Asia & Pacific 3,270,150 44 Commonwealth Bank of Australia Australia Asia & Pacific 688,400
5 Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Japan Asia & Pacific 2,992,970 47 Rabobank Netherlands Europe 662,770
6 HSBC UK Europe 2,715,150 49 DZ Bank Germany Europe 627,310
7 JPMorgan Chase USA North America 2,687,380 52 National Australia Bank Australia Asia & Pacific 571,340
8 Bank of America USA North America 2,434,080 55 State Bank of India India Asia & Pacific 561,740
9 BNP Paribas France Europe 2,429,260 60 Sberbank Russia Europe 482,530
10 Crédit Agricole France Europe 2,256,720 61 Shinhan Financial Group South Korea Asia & Pacific 478,500
12 SMBC Group Japan Asia & Pacific 1,954,780 66 DBS Singapore Asia & Pacific 430,450
13 Citigroup USA North America 1,951,160 76 Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation Singapore Asia & Pacific 365,570
14 Wells Fargo USA North America 1,927,560 77 Banco do Brasil Brazil South America 365,510
15 Mizuho Financial Japan Asia & Pacific 1,874,890 79 Bradesco Brazil South America 345,210
16 Santander Spain Europe 1,702,610 na HDFC Bank India Asia & Pacific 214,338
17 Société Générale France Europe 1,522,050 na Malayan Banking Malaysia Asia & Pacific 202,914
18 Barclays UK Europe 1,510,140 na Standard Bank South Africa Africa 156,471
19 BPCE Group France Europe 1,501,590 na CIMB Group Malaysia Asia & Pacific 139,404
21 Deutsche Bank Germany Europe 1,456,260 na FirstRand South Africa Africa 118,709
23 Royal Bank of Canada Canada North America 1,116,310 na Bank Mandiri Indonesia Asia & Pacific 94,653
Table
2:
Banks
included
227
===== page 48 =====
LEVEL OF TRBC CLASSIFICATION TRBC ID CODE SECTOR
5.1.2 Sectors selected Long-term corporate loans are in particular each piece separately. Bonds are issued on Bookratio:
The selection of sectors was based on Thomson’s useful to finance expansion plans, which only a large scale by governments, but also by
Business Sector 5010 Energy - Fossil Fuels
TRBC classification. The TRBC includes five levels of generate rewards after some period of time. corporations. Like shares, bonds are traded
classification. From the largest to the most detailed: The proceeds of corporate loans can be used on the stock exchange. To issue bonds, a
Business Sector 5230 Industrial Conglomerates
for all activities of the company. Often long- company needs the assistance of one or more
Economic Sector Business Sector 5710 Technology Equipment term loans are extended by a loan syndicate, (investment) banks which underwrite a certain Table 4 shows the commitment assigned
Business Sector which is a group of banks brought together by amount of the bonds. Underwriting is in effect to bookrunner groups with our estimation
Industry Group Business Sector 5910 Utilities one or more arranging banks. The loan syndi- buying with the intention of selling to investors. method. When the number of total partici-
Industry cate will only undersign the loan agreement if Still, in case the investment bank fails to sell all pants in relation to the number of bookrun-
Industry Group 512010 Metals & Mining
Activity the company can provide certain guarantees bonds it has underwritten, it will end up owning ners increases, the share that is attributed to
that interest and repayments on the loan will the bonds. bookrunners decreases. This prevents very
Industry Group 512020 Construction Materials
The 2012 schema, which consists of 10 economic be fulfilled. large differences in amounts attributed to
sectors, 28 business sectors, 54 industry groups, Industry Group 513020 Non paper packaging 5.1.4 Financial institution bookrunners and other participants.
136 industries and 837 activities, can be found at: Project finance financing contributions
https://www.refinitiv.com/content/dam/market- Industry Group 521010 Aerospace & Defense One specific form of corporate loan is project During the financial data collection process,
ing/en_us/documents/quick-reference-guides/ finance. This is a loan that is earmarked for a this research utilised a financial database
Industry Group 521020 Machinery, Equipment & Components
trbc-business-classification-quick-guide.pdf. specific project. (Refinitiv, formerly known as Thomson EIKON).
BOOKRATIO LOANS ISSUANCES
Corporate loans, credit and underwriting
Industry Group 522010 Construction & Engineering
For more details on Thomson’s TRBC classification, General corporate purposes facilities provided to the selected companies
please refer to Thomson’s website Industry Group 524050 Freight & Logistics services / working capital were researched for the period January 2019 > 1/3 75 per cent 75 per cent
(https://www.refinitiv.com/en/financial-data/indices/ Often a company will receive a loan for general -December 2019.
> 2/3 60 per cent 75 per cent
trbc-business-classification). Industry Group 532020 Textiles & Apparel corporate purposes or for working capital. On
The sectors selected for this study belonged to occasion while the use of proceeds is reported Financial databases often record loans and
> 1.5 40 per cent 75 per cent
Industry Group 532040 Household Goods
three different levels of classification by Thomson: as general corporate purposes, it is in fact issuance underwriting when these are pro-
Business (2), Industry Group (3), Industry (4). Sectors earmarked for a certain project. This is difficult vided by a syndicate of financial institutions. > 3.0 < 40 per cent* < 75 per cent*
Industry Group 534030 Other Specialty Retailers
were selected according to their impact on the biodi- to ascertain. The level of detail per deal often varies. Some
versity. Table 3 shows the list of the sectors selected Industry 50201020 Renewable Fuels sources may omit the maturity date or term
for the study. 5.1.3.2 Share issuances of the loan, the use of proceeds, or even the
Industry 51101010 Commodity Chemicals Issuing shares on the stock exchange gives exact issue date. Financial databases often
5.1.3 Types of finance a company the opportunity to increase its do not report on the proportions of a given
Industry 51101020 Agricultural Chemicals This section describes the types of finance included equity by attracting a large number of new deal that can be attributed to the participants.
in the research. Financial institutions can invest in shareholders or increasing the equity from its In such instances, this research calculated an
Industry 51101030 Specialty Chemicals
companies through a number of modalities. Finan- existing shareholders. estimated contribution based on the rules of
cial institutions can provide credit to a company. Industry 51101090 Diversified Chemicals thumb described below.
This includes providing loans and the underwriting When a company offers its shares on the
of share and bond issuances. Financial institutions Industry 51301010 Forest & Wood Products stock exchange for first time, this is called an Individual bank contributions to syndicated
can also invest in the equity and debt of a company Initial Public Offering (IPO). When a compa- loans and underwriting (bond and share issu-
Industry 51301020 Paper Products
by holding shares and bonds. This section outlines ny’s shares are already traded on the stock ance underwriting) were recorded to the largest
the different types of financing, how they were exchange, this is called a secondary offering extent possible where these details where
Industry 51302020 Paper Packaging
researched, and the implications for the study. of additional shares. To arrange an IPO or a included in the financial database, or company
Industry 52406010 Airlines secondary offering, a company needs the or media publications.
5.1.3.1 Corporate loans assistance of one or more (investment) banks,
The easiest way to obtain debt is to borrow money. Industry 53101010 Auto & Truck Manufacturers which will promote the shares and find share- In many cases, the total value of a loan or
In most cases, money is borrowed from commercial holders. The role of investment banks in this issuance is known, as are the banks that par-
Industry 53101020 Auto, Truck & Motorcycle Parts banks. Loans can be either short-term or long-term process therefore is very important. ticipate in this loan or issuance. However, often
in nature. Short-term loans (including trade credits, the amount that each individual bank commits
Industry 53101030 Tires & Rubber Products
current accounts, and leasing agreements) have a The role of the investment bank is temporary. to the loan or issuance has to be estimated.
maturity of less than a year. They are mostly used Industry 53203010 Homebuilding The investment bank purchases the shares In the first instance, this research attempted
as working capital for day-to-day operations. Short- initially and then promotes the shares and finds to calculate each individual bank’s commit-
term debts are often provided by a single commercial Industry 53301010 Hotels, Motels & Cruise Lines shareholders. When all issued shares that the ment on the basis of the fee they received
bank, which does not ask for substantial guarantees financial institution has underwritten are sold, as a proportion of the total fees received by
Industry 53301020 Restaurants & Bars
from the company. they are no longer included in the balance all financial institutions. This proportion (e.g.
sheet or the portfolio of the financial institution. Bank A received 10 per cent of all fees) was
Industry 54102010 Fishing & Farming
A long-term loan has a maturity of at least one year, However, the assistance provided by financial then applied to the known total deal value (e.g.
but generally of three to ten years. Industry 54102020 Food Processing institutions to companies in share issuances is 10 per cent x US$ 10 million = US$ 1 million
crucial. They provide the company with access for Bank A).
Industry 54102030 Tobacco to capital markets and provide a guarantee
that shares will be bought at a pre-determined Where deal fee data was missing or incom-
Industry 54201010 Household Products
minimum price. plete, this research used the bookratio. The
bookratio (see formula below) is used to
Industry 54201020 Personal Products
5.1.3.3 Bond issuances determine the spread over bookrunners and
Industry 54301020 Food Retail & Distribution Issuing bonds can best be described as cut- other managers.
ting a large loan into small pieces and selling
Table
3:
Scope
of
sectors
228
Number of participants - number of bookrunners
Number of bookrunners
Table 4: Commitment to
assigned bookrunner groups
* In case of deals with a bookratio of more
than 3.0, we use a formula which gradually
lowers the commitment assigned to the
bookrunners as the bookratio increases.
The formula used for this:
1
Bookratio
1.443375673
The number in the denominator is used to let
the formula start at 40 per cent in case of a
bookratio of 3.0. As the bookratio increases the
formula will go down from 40 per cent. In case
of issuances the number in the denominator is
0.769800358.
5.1.5 Timeframe
Corporate loans, bond and share issuances
are considered credit activities. The scope of
this research for credit activities is January
2019 to December 2019.
5.1.6 Data sources
For the collection of financial data, this research
relied on the financial database Refinitiv (for-
merly Thomson Reuters Eikon).
===== page 49 =====
5.2 Linking Finance to Biodiversity Risks
Each Thomson Reuters Business Classifica- In order to link bank loans to companies tion (TRBC) code was classified as having operating in various industries, the largest bio-
either direct or indirect impacts on biodiver- diversity-impacting activities identified by the
sity. Direct impacts are those where industry Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on
activities are likely to immediately impact Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES)
biodiversity from its business activities. Indus- were matched with the TRBC codes. To do
tries classified as having indirect impacts this IPBES sectors were adjusted slightly in Aerospace & Defense Indirect X X
usually enable industries with direct impacts order to provide a better fit to the TRBC codes.
Agricultural Chemicals Direct X X
often through demand and supply in their The following biodiversity impact sectors
value chains. For instance, the TRBC code for were included:
Airlines Direct X X
diversified mining, was classified as having
direct impacts while the electronic equipment • Food system and agricultural commodities Aluminum Direct X
that often contains gold, has been classified • Forestry and non-food forest commodities
Apparel & Accessories Indirect X
as having indirect impacts on biodiversity. • Metal and mineral mining
Supply chain generated indirect impacts are • Fossil fuels Apparel & Accessories Retailers Indirect X X
significant drivers of biodiversity impacts and • Infrastructure
this is increasingly recognised by downstream • Tourism Appliances, Tools & Housewares Indirect X
supply chain actors. As a result, a number of • Relocation of goods and people
Auto & Truck Manufacturers Indirect X
retailers, processors and traders have policies
to limit the biodiversity impacts of their supply It should be noted that many of the TRBC Auto Vehicles, Parts & Service Retailers Indirect X X
chains and provide information about whom codes can be linked to multiple impact seg-
Auto, Truck & Motorcycle Parts Indirect X
they are sourcing from. For example, most ments. In such instances, the value of loans
large manufacturers of fast-moving consumer was split equally between the associated
Coal Direct X
goods companies that use palm oil have biodiversity impact sectors in order to keep
committed to not purchase supply linked to the total value of loans the same. Commodity Chemicals Direct X X
deforestation, and to publish detailed lists from
Communications & Networking Indirect X
which palm oil mills they source from. Palm
oil traders and some retailers have adopted
Computer & Electronics Retailers Indirect X X
similar policies. Banks can significantly reduce
their biodiversity impacts by only providing Computer Hardware Indirect X
loans to companies whose supply chain are
Construction & Engineering Direct X X
free of such impacts.
Construction Materials Indirect X X
Courier, Postal, Air Freight & Land-based Logistics Direct X
Diversified Chemicals Direct X X
Diversified Mining Direct X
Electric Utilities Direct X
Electrical Components & Equipment Indirect X
Electronic Equipment & Parts Indirect X
Fishing & Farming Direct X
Food Processing Indirect X
Food Retail & Distribution Indirect X X
Footwear Indirect X X
Forest & Wood Products Direct X X
Gold Direct X
Ground Freight & Logistics Direct X
Heavy Electrical Equipment Indirect X
Heavy Machinery & Vehicles Indirect X
Home Furnishings Direct X
Home Furnishings Retailers Indirect X X
Home Improvement Products & Services Retailers Indirect X X
stcapmi
ytisrevidoib
dna
srotces
ssenisub
neewteb
skniL
:5
elbaT
SEIRTSUDNI
CBRT
HTAP
TCAPMI
&
NOITCUDORP
DOOF
LARUTLUCIRGA SEITIDOMMOC
DOOF-NON
&
YRTSEROF
SEITIDOMMOC
TSEROF
&
SLATEM
GNINIM
LARENIM
SLEUF
LISSOF
ERUTCURTSARFNI
MSIRUOT
SDOOG
FO NOITACOLER ELPOEP
DNA
===== page 50 =====
5.3 Policy Assessment
Homebuilding Direct X X X Methodology
Hotels, Motels & Cruise Lines Direct X
Household Electronics Indirect X The assessment of bank policies is split into two
sections of indicators. The first section assesses key
Household Products Indirect X X
indicators related to bank policies and commitments
which are relevant to protecting biodiversity. The sec-
Independent Power Producers Direct X
ond section grades banks according to the degree
Industrial Conglomerates Direct X they exclude the financing of companies engaged in
activities with high biodiversity impacts across the
Industrial Machinery & Equipment Indirect X
key human drivers of biodiversity loss.
Integrated Oil & Gas Direct X X
Each indicator was assigned a maximum number of
Iron & Steel Direct X points. Banks were graded as having high, medium,
low, or no compliance with the indicators. Points were
Marine Freight & Logistics Direct X
then calculated dependent on the grade assigned:
Mining Support Services & Equipment Indirect X
High: maximum points
Miscellaneous Specialty Retailers Indirect X
Medium: half of maximum points
Low: a third of maximum points
Multiline Utilities Direct X
No: zero points
Natural Gas Utilities Indirect X X
In total 46 points were available in the policy and
Non-Gold Precious Metals & Minerals Direct X
commitments section, and 54 points in the exclusion
section.
Non-Paper Containers & Packaging Indirect X
Office Equipment Indirect X Note that some indicators were only graded high or
no; or high, medium and no.
Oil & Gas Drilling Direct X
Oil & Gas Exploration and Production Direct X X
Oil & Gas Refining and Marketing Direct X X
Oil & Gas Transportation Services Direct X X X
Oil Related Services and Equipment Indirect X
Paper Packaging Indirect X
Paper Products Indirect X
Personal Products Indirect X
Phones & Handheld Devices Indirect X
Renewable Fuels Direct X X
Restaurants & Bars Indirect X X
Semiconductor Equipment & Testing Indirect X
Semiconductors Indirect X
Shipbuilding Indirect X X
Specialty Chemicals Direct X X X
Specialty Mining & Metals Direct X
Textiles & Leather Goods Indirect X X
Tires & Rubber Products Direct X
Tobacco Direct X
Water & Related Utilities Direct X
===== page 51 =====
WOL
MUIDEM
HGIH
STP
XAM
ROTCES/YROGETAC
ON
SEICILOP
DNA STNEMTIMMOC
YTISREVIDOIB
LLAREVO
3
ecnanrevog
ytilibaniatsuS
1.1
a/n
a/n
level-hgih
ralimis a ro draob s’knab ehT
llarevo sah
laudividni ro eettimmoc evitucexe .ytilibaniatsus rof ytilibisnopser
4
ytisrevidoib
hgih
fo oteV
2.1
sa hcus
saera
cfiiceps
ot
detimil
si thgir oteV
a/n
-isop ralimis
a ro( rotcerid ytilibaniatsus ehT
dna
ecnanfi
tcapmi
wylno
selcihev
ecnanfi neerg
-tsevni dna
snaol lla otev ot thgir eht sah )noit
snaol
sdnuorg
eht no dlohserht tes a evoba stnem
.stcapmi
ytisrevidoib detciderp rieht fo
4
noitarenumeR
3.1
lanoitarepo
ot
deknil
si noitaremuner
ehT
-tuo tnuocca otni sekat noitaremuner
ehT
era sevitucexe
fo segakcap noitaremuner ehT
segakcap
-sime
sa hcus(
ylno
srotacidni
latnemnorivne
cfiiceps rof stnemtsevni dna snaol
fo semoc
dna snaol
fo semoctuo ytisrevidoib ot deknil
raelc
edivorp
ton
seod
ynapmoc
eht ro )snois
hcus( stcapmi ytisrevidoib hgih
htiw srotces
.stnemtsevni
era
seussi
detaler
ytisrevidoib
woh
noitamrofni
fo gninim ,yrtserof ,erutlucirga
,seirehsfi sa
.segakcap
noitaremuner
ni detargetni
)sleuf lissof
3
ot tnemtimmoC
4.1
a/n
a/n
selpicnirP
rotauqE eht detpoda sah knab ehT
selpicnirp
rotauqE
eht nihtiw
ssergorp sti no detroper sah dna sraey owt tsal
4
ihciA
rof
troppuS
5.1
a/n
-revidoiB ihciA eht stroppus ylcilbup
knab ehT
seetsevni
dna srotiderc seriuqer knab ehT
stegraT
ytisrevidoiB
.stegraT ytis
htiw enil
ni seicilop ytisrevidoib ot timmoc ot .stegraT ytisrevidoiB ihciA
4
ytisrevidoib
no
gnitropeR
6.1
a/n
deliated esolcsid ot stimmoc
knab ehT
sksir detaler-ytisrevidoib
sesolcsid knab ehT
sksir
tcapmi
ssenisub rieht rof sksir detaler-ytisrevidoib
srotces gnitcapmi
ytisrevidoib rojam fo sksir ro
.erutuf eht ni
,yrtserof ,erutlucirga
,seirehsfi tsael ta gnidulcni
gnitroper
ksiR .sleuf lissof dna gninim dna
fo eulav eht
tsael ta fo erusolcsid eht sedulcni
ytisrevidoib
tnacfiingis gnivah fo ksir ta snaol
fo egatnecrep
dna rebmun eht dna ,stcapmi
ecnegilid eud
)decnahne( tnewrednu taht snaol
eht sa llew
sa seussi ytisrevidoib laitnetop rof
eud denilced
snaol fo egatnecrep dna rebmun .seussi hcus ot
4
ycilop
ytisrevidoiB
7.1
eht
noitnem
stnemucod
cilbup
s’knab ehT
a dehsilbup dna depoleved
sah knab ehT
taht ycilop
ytisrevidoib llarevo na sah knab ehT
yllareneg
ytisrevidoib
evresnoc/tcetorp
ot deen
slaog raelc htiw ycilop cfiiceps-ytisrevidoib
senotselim
elbarusaem dna senilemit sedulcni
latnemnorivne
cfiiceps
fo
txetnoc
ni tsuj ton(
gnidnel sti fo stcapmi ytisrevidoib
ecuder ot
dna gnidnel
fo stcapmi ytisrevidoib ecuder ot
,seirehsfi
tsael
ta
rof seicilop
sah ro )seussi
dna senilemit on tub ,seitivitca
gnicnanfi dna
.seitivitca gnicnanfi
sleuf
lissof
dna
,gninim
,yrtserof
,erutlucirga
.senotselim
elbarusaem
4
tcapmi
ytisrevidoiB
8.1
a/n
-rapsnart a poleved ot tnemtimmoc
a si erehT
eud cilbup
dna tnerapsnart a sah knab ehT
ssecorp
ecnegilid
eud
taht erudecorp ecnegilid eud
cilbup dna tne
lla srevoc
taht ecalp ni erudecorp ecnegilid
stnemtsevni dna snaol etaroproc
lla srevoc
setaler dna
stnemtsevni dna snaol etaroproc
ssorca stcapmi ytisrevidoib
ot setaler dna
gnidnel
lla ssorca stcapmi ytisrevidoib ot
.srotces yrtsudni dna seitivitca
gnidnel lla
,ylevitanretlA
.srotces yrtsudni dna seitivitca
srotces rof tnemtimmoc a si ereht
,ylevitanretlA
-ilid eud
tnerapsnart dna deliated a si ereht
yrtserof ,erutlucirga ,seirehsfi tsael
ta gnidulcni
ta gnidulcni
srotces rof ecalp ni metsys ecneg
sah knab eht dna ,sleuf lissof dna
,gninim dna
,gninim dna
yrtserof ,erutlucirga ,seirehsfi tsael
-ulcxe sti rof ”muidem“ tsael ta
dedarg neeb
dedarg neeb
sah knab eht dna ,sleuf lissof dna
.srotces eseht fo hcae ni
seitivitca nois
ni seitivitca
noisulcxe sti rof ”muidem“ tsael ta .srotces eseht fo hcae
4
tcapmi
ytisrevidoiB
9.1
-revidoib
a
poleved
ot tnemtimmoc
si erehT
ssecorp eht ni si knab eht ecnedive
si erehT
eht
serusaem dna no stroper knab ehT
gnirusaem
eht ni
ygolodohtem
tnemerusaem
tcapmi ytis
-erusaem tcapmi ytisrevidoib a
gnipoleved fo
ot ytisrevidoib
no secivres sti fo stcapmi
rof tsael
ta
,eno
gnitsixe
na
gnisu
ot ro ,erutuf
na gniylppa si ro ygolodohtem
metsys tnem
tnerapsnart
a gnisu ,seetsevni dna srotiderc
.sdnuf
tsilaiceps GSE
tnemtsevni lla ssorca ygolodohtem
gnitsixe
hcus sah
knab eht ,ylevitanretlA .ygolodohtem
ssecorp eht ni si knab eht ,ylevitanretlA
.saera
,erutlucirga
,seirehsfi eht tsael ta rof metsys a
eht tsael ta rof metsys a hcus
gnipoleved fo
.srotces
leuf lissof dna ,gninim dna yrtserof
dna ,gninim dna yrtserof ,erutlucirga
,seirehsfi
.srotces
leuf lissof
4
ytisrevidoiB
01.1
a/n
a/n
ecnalab
knab fo gnitset-sserts yrotadnaM
gnitset
sserts
ylcilbup
si stcapmi ytisrevidoib rof steehs .detroppus
a/n
a/n
-itsni ecnanfi
taht detats ylcilbup sah knab ehT
4
latnemnorivnE
11.1
yrotadnam
evah ot deriuqer eb dluohs snoitut
ecnarusni
ytilibail
.ecnarusni ytilibail latnemnorivne
a evah
srevas
taht
setats
ylcilbup
knab ehT
-lusnoc a poleved ot dettimmoc
sah knab ehT
noitatlusnoc
lanoitarepo na sah knab ehT
4
sthgir
’srevaS/nezitiC
21.1
tahw
no
detlusnoc
eb
dluohs
dna
wonk ot thgir
evah ot sremotsuc/srevas rof
ssecorp noitat
a evah ot
sremotsuc/srevas gniwolla ssecorp
saera
rof gnidulcni
,ni detsevni
si yenom rieht
knab eht seirtsudni dna stcejorp
tahw yas a
knab eht
seirtsudni dna stcejorp tahw ni yas
.seussi
ytisrevidoib
htiw
.seussi ytisrevidoib ot etaler lliw
taht ni stsevni
.seussi
ytisrevidoib ot etaler taht ni stsevni
64
latotbuS
0
===== page 52 =====
SEICILOP
DNA
STNEMTIMMOC
YTISREVIDOIB
LLAREVO
seitivitca
2
sedulcxE
seitivitca
ruof
ro
eerht
sedulcxE
seitivitca
erom
ro
evfi
sedulcxE
8
erutlucauqA
dna
seirehsiF
1.2
-vitca
noisulcxe
stimil
ro
ytivitca
owt
sedulcxE
seitivitca
ruof
ro
eerht
sedulcxE
seitivitca
erom
ro
evfi
sedulcxE
8
erutlucirgA
2.2
hcus(
seitidommoc
larutlucirga
cfiiceps
ot
seiti
)rehtael
ro
,yos
,mlap
sa
noisulcxe
stimil
ro
seitivitca
owt
sedulcxE
seitivitca
ruof
ro
eerht
sedulcxE
seitivitca
erom
ro
evfi
sedulcxE
7
ygreneoib
dna
yrtseroF
3.2
seitidommoc
cfiiceps
ot
seitivitca
seitivitca
owt
sedulcxE
seitivitca
ruof
ro
eerht
sedulcxE
seitivitca
erom
ro
evfi
sedulcxE
7
gnidulcxe(
gniniM
4.2
)sleuf
lissof
seitivitca
owt
sedulcxE
seitivitca
ruof
ro
eerht
sedulcxE
seitivitca
erom
ro
evfi
sedulcxE
7
sleuF
lissoF
5.2
seitivitca
owt
sedulcxE
seitivitca
ruof
ro
eerht
sedulcxE
seitivitca
erom
ro
evfi
sedulcxE
7
erutcurtsarfnI
6.2
seitivitca
owt
sedulcxE
seitivitca
ruof
ro
eerht
sedulcxE
seitivitca
erom
ro
evfi
sedulcxE
5
msiruoT
7.2
seitivitca
owt
sedulcxE
seitivitca
ruof
ro
eerht
sedulcxE
seitivitca
erom
ro
evfi
sedulcxE
5
tropsnarT
dna
scitsigoL
8.2
45
latotbuS
001
elbaliava
stniop
LATOT
Notes:
To achieve points for excluding activities in
internationally-recognised biodiversity risk
areas, banks will have to exclude funding for
projects impacting at least two of the following:
UNESCO World Heritage sites, RAMSAR sites,
IUCN category I-IV protected areas, or areas
identified by the Alliance for zero extinction.
To achieve full points in the fisheries section,
banks must have at least two exclusions that
fundamentally address destructive fishing
practices such as bottom trawling or the global
overfishing of stocks.
In the fossil fuel section, companies can only
claim points for excusing coal if both new coal
mining and new coal powerplants are excluded
from funding. The Exclusion for Mountain Top
Removal (MTR) does not warrant points on
its own.
In the Agriculture sector, banks cannot reach
full points if all exclusion activities are related
to one or two commodities only, such as palm
oil or soy.
srotacidni
tnemssessa
yciloP
:6
elbaT
===== page 53 =====
Table 7: Full grades and scores for all banks POLICY INDICATORS EXCLUSION INDICATORS
V 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 1.1 1.11 1.12 Policy 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 Exclusion Grand
Total Total Total
BANCO BILBAO Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO MED HIGH NO HIGH HIGH LOW NO LOW
VIZCAYA ARGENTARIA
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 4.00 8.00 0.00 7.00 7.00 2.33 0.00 1.67 30.00 37.33
BNP PARIBAS Grade HIGH NO LOW HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO LOW HIGH HIGH MED HIGH NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 1.33 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.67 2.67 8.00 7.00 3.50 7.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 28.17 36.83
ING GROUP Grade HIGH NO LOW HIGH NO NO LOW MED NO NO NO NO MED HIGH MED LOW MED LOW NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 1.33 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 10.67 4.00 8.00 3.50 2.33 3.50 2.33 0.00 0.00 23.67 34.33
UBS Grade HIGH NO LOW NO NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO LOW HIGH LOW LOW HIGH LOW LOW LOW
Score 3.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.67 2.67 8.00 2.33 2.33 7.00 2.33 1.67 1.67 28.00 33.67
LLOYDS BANKING Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW MED NO NO NO NO MED MED LOW MED HIGH NO NO NO
GROUP
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 9.33 4.00 4.00 2.33 3.50 7.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 20.83 30.17
CRÉDIT AGRICOLE Grade HIGH NO LOW HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO MED MED LOW HIGH NO NO LOW
Score 3.00 0.00 1.33 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.67 0.00 4.00 3.50 2.33 7.00 0.00 0.00 1.67 18.50 27.17
NATWEST Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO NO MED NO NO NO NO MED MED MED NO HIGH NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.00 4.00 4.00 3.50 0.00 7.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 18.50 26.50
HSBC Grade HIGH LOW LOW High NO NO Low NO NO NO NO NO NO HIGH MED LOW LOW NO NO NO
Score 3.00 1.33 1.33 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 10.00 0.00 8.00 3.50 2.33 2.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 16.17 26.17
CREDIT SUISSE Grade HIGH NO LOW HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO MED MED MED MED LOW NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 1.33 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.67 0.00 4.00 3.50 3.50 3.50 2.33 0.00 0.00 16.83 25.50
GOLDMAN SACHS Grade HIGH NO LOW NO NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO LOW LOW LOW LOW MED LOW LOW LOW
Score 3.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.67 2.67 2.67 2.33 2.33 3.50 2.33 1.67 1.67 19.17 24.83
RABOBANK Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO MED MED NO NO NO NO MED LOW NO NO HIGH no no no
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 10.00 4.00 2.67 0.00 0.00 7.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 13.67 23.67
BARCLAYS Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO HIGH MED NO MED NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 0.00 8.00 3.50 0.00 3.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 15.00 22.33
SOCIÉTÉ GÉNÉRALE Grade HIGH NO LOW HIGH NO NO LOW MED LOW NO NO NO NO MED LOW NO MED NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 1.33 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 2.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 12.00 0.00 4.00 2.33 0.00 3.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 9.83 21.83
UNICREDIT Grade HIGH NO LOW HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO MED NO HIGH LOW NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 1.33 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.67 0.00 0.00 3.50 0.00 7.00 2.33 0.00 0.00 12.83 21.50
BPCE GROUP Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO MED MED MED MED NO NO NO NO NO NO NO HIGH NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 14.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.00 21.00
===== page 54 =====
POLICY INDICATORS EXCLUSION INDICATORS
V 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 1.1 1.11 1.12 Policy 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 Exclusion Grand
Total Total Total
DBS BANK Grade HIGH NO LOW HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO no HIGH NO NO MED NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 1.33 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.67 0.00 8.00 0.00 0.00 3.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 11.50 20.17
SANTANDER Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO LOW MED LOW MED NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 0.00 2.67 3.50 2.33 3.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 12.00 19.33
FIRSTRAND Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO LOW NO NO NO HIGH NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 2.67 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 9.67 17.00
BANK OF AMERICA Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO LOW LOW LOW NO NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 0.00 2.67 2.33 2.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 14.67
OCBC BANK Grade HIGH NO NO NO NO NO LOW MED NO NO NO NO NO LOW LOW NO LOW NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.33 0.00 2.67 2.33 0.00 2.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 13.67
DEUTSCHE BANK Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO LOW NO NO MED NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 0.00 2.67 0.00 0.00 3.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.17 13.50
TORONTO-DOMINION Grade HIGH NO LOW HIGH NO NO LOW MED NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO LOW NO NO NO
BANK
Score 3.00 0.00 1.33 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 2.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 10.67 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.33 13.00
NATIONAL AUSTRALIA Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO MED NO NO NO
BANK
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.50 10.83
COMMONWEALTH Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO MED NO NO NO
BANK OF AUSTRALIA
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.50 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.50 10.83
SMBC GROUP Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO LOW NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.33 9.67
CITIGROUP Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO LOW NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.33 9.67
JPMORGAN CHASE Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO LOW NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.33 9.67
CREDIT MUTUEL Grade HIGH NO NO NO NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO LOW LOW NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.33 2.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.67 9.00
BANCO DO BRASIL Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.67 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.67
INTESA SANPAOLO Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO LOW NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.33 8.33
===== page 55 =====
POLICY INDICATORS EXCLUSION INDICATORS
V 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 1.1 1.11 1.12 Policy 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 Exclusion Grand
Total Total Total
MORGAN STANLEY Grade HIGH NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO LOW NO NO LOW NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 2.67 0.00 0.00 2.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.00 8.00
STANDARD BANK Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33
CIMB GROUP Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33
BRADESCO Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33
ROYAL BANK OF Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
CANADA
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33
MIZUHO FINANCIAL Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33
NORINCHUKIN BANK Grade HIGH NO NO High NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33
MITSUBISHI UFJ Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
FINANCIAL
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.33
DZ BANK Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO NO NO NO NO NO no NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.00
WELLS FARGO Grade HIGH NO NO HIGH NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.00
CHINA CONSTRUC- Grade HIGH LOW NO NO NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
TION BANK
Score 3.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.67 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.67
SHINHAN FINANCIAL Grade HIGH NO NO NO NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
GROUP
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.33
BANK MANDIRI Grade HIGH NO NO NO NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.33
MALAYAN BANKING Grade HIGH NO NO NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.33
===== page 56 =====
POLICY INDICATORS EXCLUSION INDICATORS
V 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 1.1 1.11 1.12 Policy 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 Exclusion Grand
Total Total Total
STATE BANK OF INDIA Grade HIGH NO NO NO NO NO LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.33
BANK OF CHINA Grade HIGH LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Score 3.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.33
AGRICULTURAL BANK Grade HIGH LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
OF CHINA
Score 3.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.33
INDUSTRIAL AND Grade HIGH LOW NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
COMMERCIAL BANK
OF CHINA
Score 3.00 1.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.33 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.33
HDFC Grade HIGH NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.00
SBERBANK Grade HIGH NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO
Score 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.00
===== page 57 =====
Endnotes
01. Barnosky, A.D. et al. (2012). Approach- 09. Smith, E. (2020, September 22). Blame 18. Sampaio, R.S.R. et al. (2016). Lenders 28. China steps up consolidation of smaller 37. De Koning, N. (2020, June 18). DNB 44. Birss, M. and Conant, J. (2020,
ing a state shift in Earth’s biosphere. the system for FinCen files, not the and Investors Environmental Liabil- banks in slowdown. (2020). Nikkei and PBL: loss of biodiversity leads to June 22). BlackRock’s Silence
Nature, 486, 52-58. https://doi. banks, experts urge. CNBC. https:// ity – How much is too much? UNEP. Asian Review. https://asia.nikkei.com/ financial risks. Regulation Tomorrow. on Forest Destruction. Amazon
org/10.1038/nature11018 www.cnbc.com/2020/09/22/blame-the- http://unepinquiry.org/wp-content/ Business/Finance/China-steps-up-con- https://www.regulationtomorrow.com/ Watch. https://amazonwatch.org/
system-for-fincen-files-not-the-banks- uploads/2016/04/Lenders_and_Inves- solidation-of-smaller-banks-caught-in- the-netherlands/dnb-and-pbl-loss-of- news/2020/0622-blackrocks-si-
02. C eballos, C. et. Al. (2017). Biologi- experts-urge.html tors_Environmental_Liability.pdf slowdown biodiversity-leads-to-financial-risks/ lence-on-forest-destruction
cal annihilation via the ongoing sixth
mass extinction signaled by vertebrate 10. Diaz, S. et al. (2019). Summary for 19. Horowitz, J. ((2020, January 22). Top 29 Convention on Biological Diver- 38. Nature loss is approaching a tipping 45. Jones, D. and Millstone, C. (2019,
population losses and declines. PNAS, policymakers of the global assessment US bankers don’t want to lead the sity,(2020). Global Biodiversity Outlook point – it’s time for financial authorities November 19). Why Industrial Livestock
114 (30) E6089-E6096. https://doi. report on biodiversity and ecosystem climate fight. CNN. https://edition.cnn. 5. Summary for policymakers. https:// to act (2020, August 26). UCL Institute Agriculture is the Next Divestment Tar-
org/10.1073/pnas.1704949114 services of the Intergovernmental com/2020/01/22/investing/davos-amer- www.cbd.int/gbo/gbo5/publication/ for Innovation and Public Purpose blog. get. Feedback. https://feedbackglobal.
Science-Policy Platform on Biodi- ican-banks-climate/index.html gbo-5-spm-en.pdf https://medium.com/iipp-blog/nature- org/why-industrial-livestock-agricul-
03. K eesing, F., Belden, L., Daszak, P. et al. versity and Ecosystem Services, loss-is-approaching-a-tipping-point- ture-is-the-next-divestment-target/
(2010). Impacts of biodiversity on the IPBES. https://ipbes.net/sites/default/ 20. IPBES (2019). Global assessment report 30. Food and Agriculture Organization of its-time-for-financial-authorities-to-act-
emergence and transmission of infec- files/2020-02/ipbes_global_assess- on biodiversity and ecosystem services the United Nations (2011). Key mes- 9a1be8a9442c 46. The FAIRR Initiative (2020). https://
tious diseases. Nature, 468, 647–652. ment_report_summary_for_policymak- of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy sages: forests for people. http://www. www.fairr.org/
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09575 ers_en.pdf Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem fao.org/forestry/iyf2011/69186/en/ 39. Commonwealth Climate and Law Initia-
Services. E. S. Brondizio, J. Settele, tive (2020). The emergence of foresee- 47. Forests and Finance (2020). https://for-
04. Givetash, L. (2020, July 23). Prevent- 11. T ask Force on Nature-Related Financial S. Díaz, and H. T. Ngo (editors). IPBES 31. Jong, H. N (2019, March 21). Compa- able biodiversity-related liability risks for estsandfinance.org/
ing the next pandemic will cost $22.2 Disclosures (2020). https://tnfd.info/ secretariat, Bonn, Germany nies to miss 2020 zero-deforestation financial institutions. A gathering storm?
billion a year, scientists say. NBC News. deadline, report says. Mongabay. https://ccli.ouce.ox.ac.uk/wp-content/ 48. Rainforest Action Network (2020).
https://www.nbcnews.com/news/ 12. Finance for Biodiversity Pledge (2020). 21. Ali, Z (2020, April 13). The world’s 100 https://news.mongabay.com/2019/03/ uploads/2020/09/CCLI-Biodiversity-lia- Banking on Climate Change. Fossil Fuel
world/preventing-next-pandemic- https://www.financeforbiodiversity.org/ largest banks. S&P Global. https:// companies-to-miss-2020-zero-defor- bility-risks-report-vFINAL.pdf Finance Report 2020. https://www.ran.
will-cost-22-2-billion-year-scientists- www.spglobal.com/marketintelli- estation-deadline-report-says/ org/bankingonclimatechange2020/
n1234688?cid=sm_npd_nn_tw_ma 13. IPBES (2019): Global assessment report gence/en/news-insights/research/ 40. Paulson Institute, The Nature Con
on biodiversity and ecosystem services the-worlds-100-largest-banks-2020 32. Naidu, R. (2019, September 27) servancy, and Cornell Atkinson Center 49. Amazon Watch and Stand.earth (2020).
05. COVID-19 has set global health prog- of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Nestle, P&G say they will miss 2020 for Sustainability (2020). Financing European Banks Financing Trade of
ress back decades: Gates Foundation Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem 22. The Equator Principles ( 2002). https:// deforestation goals. Reuters. https:// Nature: Closing the Global Biodi- Controversial Amazon Oil to the U.S.
(2020, September 15). https://www. Services. E. S. Brondizio, J. Settele, equator-principles.com/about/ www.reuters.com/article/consum- versity Financing Gap. https://www. https://amazonwatch.org/assets/
euractiv.com/section/health-consum- S. Díaz, and H. T. Ngo (editors). IPBES er-goods-deforestation/nestle-pg-say- paulsoninstitute.org/key-initiatives/ files/2020-08-12-eu-banks-financing-
ers/news/covid-19-has-set-global- secretariat, Bonn, Germany 23. Convention on Biological Diversity they-will-miss-2020-deforestation- financing-nature-report/ amazon-oil-summary.pdf
health-progress-back-decades-gates- (2020). Aichi Biodiversity Targets. goals-idUSL2N26I0WC
foundation/ 14. Convention on Biological Diver- https://www.cbd.int/sp/targets/ 41. ShareAction (2020, June 11) Asset 50. Wijeratna, A. (2020). Complicit. An
sity,(2020). Global Biodiversity Outlook 33. Greenpeace (2018). The Final Count- managers are blind to biodiversity Investigation into Deforestation at
06. World Economic Forum (2020, January 5. Summary for policymakers. https:// 24. The rise of the superstars (2016, down: Now or never to reform the palm loss crisis. https://shareaction.org/ Michelin’s Royal Lestari Utama Project
19). Half of World’s GDP Moderately or www.cbd.int/gbo/gbo5/publication/ September 15). The Econo- oil industry. https://www.greenpeace. asset-managers-are-blind-to-biodiver- in Sumatra, Indonesia. Mighty Earth.
Highly Dependent on Nature, Says New gbo-5-spm-en.pdf mist. https://www.economist. org/international/publication/18455/ sity-loss-crisis/#:~:text=In%20its%20 http://www.mightyearth.org/wp-con-
Report [Press release]. https://www. com/special-report/2016/09/15/ the-final-countdown-forests-indone- latest%20analysis%20published,sur- tent/uploads/Mighty_Earth_MichelinRe-
weforum.org/press/2020/01/half-of- 15. Lamkin, M. and Miller, AI. ( 2016). On the-rise-of-the-superstars sia-palm-oil/ veyed%20managers%20state%20 port5Oct2020FINAL.pdf
world-s-gdp-moderately-or-highly-de- the Challenge of Comparing Contem- in%20their
pendent-on-nature-says-new-report/ porary and Deep-Time Biological-Ex- 25. Österblom, H. et al. (2015). Trans- 34. Jong, H. N. (2020, May 29) Indonesia 51. Stop the Money Pipeline (2020). https://
tinction Rates. BioScience66 (9), s 785 national Corporations as ‘Keystone to receive $56m payment from Norway 42. Chain Reaction Research (2020). stopthemoneypipeline.com/about-2/
07. Note that the total of investments in -789. https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/ Actors’ in Marine Ecosystems. PLoS for reducing deforestation. Mongabay. Financing Deforestation Increasingly
the sectors is higher than the actual biw088 ONE 10(5): e0127533. https://doi. https://news.mongabay.com/2020/05/ Risky Due to Tightening Regula- 52. Plunkett Research Ltd (2020). Plunkett’s
total of the finance since some industry org/10.1371/journal.pone.0127533 indonesia-norway-redd-payment-de- tory Frameworks. https://chainre- Food Industry Market Research. https://
sectors are linked to multiple drivers of 16. IPBES (2019). Global assessment report forestation-carbon-emission-cli- actionresearch.com/wp-content/ www.plunkettresearch.com/industries/
biodiversity loss. on biodiversity and ecosystem services 26. Rhoades, S.A. (2000). Bank Mergers mate-change/ uploads/2020/02/Financing-Deforesta- food-beverage-grocery-market-re-
of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy and Banking Structure in the United tion-Increasingly-Risky-Due-to-Regula- search/
08. Balvanera, P. et al. (2019, May 31). Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem States, 1980-98. Federal Reserve. 35. Forest 500. (2020). 2019 Annual Report. tory-Frameworks.pdf
Chapter 2. Status and trends; indirect Services. E. S. Brondizio, J. Settele, https://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ https://forest500.org/sites/default/files/ 53. World Bank (2017, April 13). Agri-
and direct drivers of change [draft]. S. Díaz, and H. T. Ngo (editors). IPBES staffstudies/2000-present/ss174.pdf forest500_annualreport2019_final_0.pdf 43. Branford, S. (2019, September 23). business. https://www.worldbank.
IPBES Global Assessment on Bio- secretariat, Bonn, Germany Prompted by Amazon fires, 230 inves- org/en/topic/agriculture/brief/
diversity and Ecosystem Services 27. Hosono, K., Sakai, K., Tsuru, K. (2007). 36. The Economics of Biodiversity: The tors warn firms linked to deforestation. help-farmers-reach-markets
[draft]. https://ipbes.net/sites/default/ 17. Constanza, R. (2014). Changes in the Consolidation of Banks in Japan: Dasgupta Review (2020). https:// Mongabay. https://news.mongabay.
files/ipbes_global_assessment_chap- global value of ecosystem services. Causes and Consequences. NBER www.gov.uk/government/collec- com/2019/09/prompted-by-amazon- 54. IPBES (2019). Global assessment report
ter_2_1_drivers_unedited_31may.pdf Global Environmental Change, 26 ( Working Paper No. 13399. https://www. tions/the-economics-of-biodiversi- fires-230-investors-warn-firms-linked- on biodiversity and ecosystem services
May), 152-158 nber.org/papers/w13399.pdf ty-the-dasgupta-review to-deforestation/ of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem
Services. E. S. Brondizio, J. Settele,
S. Díaz, and H. T. Ngo (editors). IPBES
secretariat, Bonn, Germany
===== page 58 =====
Endnotes
55. U nited Nations (2020). UN Comtrade 64. IPBES (2019). Global assessment report 74. Wilcox, C. et al. (2013). Ghostnet 83. Globalagriculture (n.d). Industrial 92. Pesticide Action Network (2020). 101. United Nations Economic and
Database. https://comtrade.un.org/ on biodiversity and ecosystem services impacts on globally threatened turtles, Agriculture and Small-scale Farm- Pesticides and the loss of biodiversity. Social Council (2017). Progress
of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy a spatial risk analysis for northern ing. https://www.globalagriculture. https://www.pan-europe.info/issues/ towards the Sustainable Devel-
56. F ood and Agriculture Organization of Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Australia. Conservation Letters,6 (4). org/report-topics/industrial-agricul- pesticides-and-loss-biodiversity opment Goals. https://www.
the United Nations (2020). The State Services. E. S. Brondizio, J. Settele, https://doi.org/10.1111/conl.12001 ture-and-small-scale-farming.html un.org/ga/search/view_doc.
of World Fisheries and Aquaculture. S. Díaz, and H. T. Ngo (editors). IPBES 93. Muth, F. and Leonard, A.S. (2019). asp?symbol=E/2017/66andLang=E.
Sustainability in Action. https://doi. secretariat, Bonn, Germany 75. IPBES (2019). Global assessment report 84. IPBES (2019). Global assessment report A neonicotinoid pesticide impairs
org/10.4060/ca9229en on biodiversity and ecosystem services on biodiversity and ecosystem services foraging, but not learning, in free-fly- 102. Bradshaw, C.J.A. et al (2009) Tropi-
65. Food and Agriculture Organization of of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy ing bumblebees. Scientific Reports cal turmoil: A biodiversity tragedy in
57. F ood and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2020). The State Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem 9, 4764. https://doi.org/10.1038/ progress. Frontiers in Ecology and the
the United Nations (2020). The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture. Services. E. S. Brondizio, J. Settele, Services. E. S. Brondizio, J. Settele, s41598-019-39701-5 Environment, 7 (2), 79–87. https://doi.
of World Fisheries and Aquaculture. Sustainability in Action. https://doi. S. Díaz, and H. T. Ngo (editors). IPBES S. Díaz, and H. T. Ngo (editors). IPBES org/10.1890/070193
Sustainability in Action. https://doi. org/10.4060/ca9229en secretariat, Bonn, Germany secretariat, Bonn, Germany 94. Stokstad, E.(2018, April 27). European
org/10.4060/ca9229en Union expands ban of three neonicoti- 103. Alroy, J. (2017). Effects of habitat dis-
66. Porobic J. et al. (2019). The impact of 76. Doyle, A. (2012, November 14). Man- 85. Convention on Biological Diver- noid pesticides. Science. https://www. turbance on tropical forest biodiversity.
58. F ood and Agriculture Organization of fishing on a highly vulnerable ecosys- groves under threat from shrimp farms: sity (2016). Sustainable Agriculture sciencemag.org/news/2018/04/europe- PNAS, 114 (23), 6056-6061. https://doi.
the United Nations (2020). The State tem, the case of Juan Fernández Ridge U.N. Reuters. https://www.reuters. [Press Brief]. https://www.cbd.int/idb/ an-union-expands-ban-three-neonicoti- org/10.1073/pnas.1611855114
of World Fisheries and Aquaculture. ecosystem. PLoS ONE 14 (2). https:// com/article/us-mangroves/mangroves- image/2016/promotional-material/idb- noid-pesticides
Sustainability in Action. https://doi. doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0212485 under-threat-from-shrimp-farms-u-n- 2016-press-brief-agro.pdf 104. Curtis, P.G. et al. (2018). Classifying
org/10.4060/ca9229en idUSBRE8AD1EG20121114 95. Beketov M.A. et al. (2013). Pesti- drivers of global forest loss. Science,
67. Shao, K.T. (2009). Marine biodiversity 86. Dudley, N. and Alexander, S. (2017). cides reduce regional biodiversity of 361, I(6407), 1108-1111. https://doi.
59. I PBES (2019). Global assessment report and fishery sustainability. Asia Pacific 77. Chatham House (2020). Resource Agriculture and biodiversity: a review. stream invertebrates. PNAS, 110(27), org/10.1126/science.aau3445
on biodiversity and ecosystem services Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 18(4), Trade.Earth. https://resourcetrade. Biodiversity,18 (2-3), 45-49. https://doi. 11039-11043. https://doi.org/10.1073/
of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy 527-531. earth/ org/10.1080/14888386.2017.1351892 pnas.1305618110 105. Gibbs, H.L. et al. (2019). Tropical forests
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem were the primary sources of new agri-
Services. E. S. Brondizio, J. Settele, 68. Pusceddu. A. et al. (2014). Chronic 78. Convention on Biological Diversity ( 87. Food and Agriculture Organization of 96. Hebert, M.P. et al (2019). The over- cultural land in the 1980s and 1990s.
S. Díaz, and H. T. Ngo (editors). IPBES and intensive bottom trawling impairs 2018, November 26). 2.6 billion people the United Nations(2020). World Food looked impact of rising glyphosate use PNAS, 107 (38),16732-16737. https://
secretariat, Bonn, Germany deep-sea biodiversity and ecosystem draw their livelihoods mostly from and Agriculture - Statistical Pocketbook on phosphorus loading in agricultural doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0910275107
functioning. PNAS, 111 (24), 8861-8866 agriculture. https://www.cbd.int/article/ 2019. http://www.fao.org/documents/ watersheds. Frontiers in Ecology and
60. F ood and Agriculture Organization of biodiversityforfood-1 card/en/c/ca6463en the Environment, 17(1), 48–56, https:// 106. Arsenault, C. (2016, July 26). Land
the United Nations (2020). The State 69. Oberle, F.K. et al. (2016). What a doi.org/10.1002/fee.1985 used for palm oil could double with-
of World Fisheries and Aquaculture. drag: Quantifying the global impact of 79. Convention on Biological Diver- 88. Goedde, L. et al. (2015, July 1). Pursu- out damaging forests: researchers.
Sustainability in Action. https://doi. chronic bottom trawling on continen- sity(2016). Sustainable Agriculture ing the global opportunity in food and 97. Konkel, L. (2019, March 18). What’s Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/
org/10.4060/ca9229en tal shelf sediment. Journal of Marine [Press Brief]. https://www.cbd.int/idb/ agribusiness. McKinsey. https://www. the world’s most widely used herbicide article/us-global-landrights-science/
Systems., 159, 109 – 119. https://doi. image/2016/promotional-material/idb- mckinsey.com/industries/chemicals/ doing to tiny critters? Environmen- land-used-for-palm-oil-could-double-
61. F ood and Agriculture Organization of org/10.1016/j.jmarsys.2015.12.007 2016-press-brief-agro.pdf our-insights/pursuing-the-global-oppor- tal Health News. https://www.ehn. without-damaging-forests-researchers-
the United Nations (2020). The State tunity-in-food-and-agribusiness org/whats-the-worlds-most-widely- idUSKCN10623I
of World Fisheries and Aquaculture. 70. McClellan, K. (2008). Coral degradation 80. Food and Agriculture Organization of used-herbicide-doing-to-tiny-crit-
Sustainability in Action. https://doi. through destructive fishing practices. the United Nations (2019, February 22). 89. Zabarenko, D. (2008, May 10). Pesticide ters-2631750527.html 107. Koh L.P., Wilcove D.S. (2008). Is oil
org/10.4060/ca9229en Encyclopedia of the Earth. https://www. The biodiversity that is crucial for our DDT shows up in Antarctic penguins. palm agriculture really destroying trop-
odyex.com/curriculum/Coral_degreda- food and agriculture is disappearing by Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/ 98. Janssens, L. and Stoks, R. (2017). ical biodiversity? Conservation Letters,
62. C ostello, M.J. and Chaudhary, C. tion_through_destructive_fishing_prac- the day. http://www.fao.org/news/story/ article/us-penguins-ddt/pesticide- Stronger Effects of Roundup Than 1(2), 1–5.
(2017). Marine Biodiversity, Bioge- tices.pdf en/item/1180463/icode/ ddt-shows-up-in-antarctic-penguins- Its Active Ingredient Glyphosate in
ography, Deep-Sea Gradients, and idUSN0933540320080510 Damselfly Larvae. Aquatic Toxicology, 108. WWF (2018). What are the biggest
Conservation. Current Biology, 27 (11), 71. Oceana (2020). Illegal Fishing: Driftnets. 81. Food and Agriculture Organization of 193, 210-216. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. drivers of tropical deforestation?
R511–R527. https://europe.oceana.org/en/our-work/ the United Nations (2019). The state 90. Miglani, R. and Biosht, S.S. (2019). aquatox.2017.10.028 https://www.worldwildlife.org/mag-
driftnets/overview of the world’s biodiversity for food and World of earthworms with pesticides azine/issues/summer-2018/articles/
63. I PBES (2019). Global assessment report agriculture. J. Bélanger, J & Pilling, D and insecticides. Interdisciplinary 99. Bayer(2020). Glyphosate’s Role in Pre- what-are-the-biggest-drivers-of-tropi-
on biodiversity and ecosystem services 72. Northridge, S.,P. (1991). Driftnet fish- (eds.). FAO Commission on Genetic Toxicology, 12(2),71–82. https://doi. serving the Environment and Biodiver- cal-deforestation
of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy eries and their impacts on non-target Resources for Food and Agriculture org/10.2478/intox-2019-0008 sity. https://www.bayer.com/en/glypho-
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem species: a worldwide review. FAO Assessments. http://www.fao.org/3/ sate-environment-biodiversity.aspx 109. Chatham House (2020). Resource
Services. E. S. Brondizio, J. Settele, Fisheries Technical Paper, No.320. CA3129EN/CA3129EN.pdf 91. Sud, M. (2020). Managing the bio- Trade.Earth. https://resourcetrade.
S. Díaz, and H. T. Ngo (editors). IPBES Food and Agriculture Organization of diversity impacts of fertiliser and 100. Sud, M. (2020), Managing the bio- earth/
secretariat, Bonn, Germany the United Nations, Rome. http://www. 82. International Labour Organization pesticide use: Overview and insights diversity impacts of fertiliser and
fao.org/3/t0502e/t0502e00.htm (2020). Agriculture: a hazardous work. from trends and policies across pesticide use: Overview and insights 110. Food and Agriculture Organization of
https://www.ilo.org/safework/areasof- selected OECD countries. OECD from trends and policies across the United Nations and UNEP (2020).
73. Oceana (2020). Illegal Fishing: Driftnets. work/hazardous-work/WCMS_110188/ Environment Working Papers, No. 155, selected OECD countries, OECD The State of the World’s Forests 2020.
https://europe.oceana.org/en/our-work/ lang--en/index.htm OECD Publishing, Paris. https://doi. Environment Working Papers, No. 155, Forests, biodiversity and people. Rome.
driftnets/overview org/10.1787/63942249-en OECD Publishing, Paris, https://doi. https://doi.org/10.4060/ca8642en
org/10.1787/63942249-en.
===== page 59 =====
Endnotes
111. Chaudhary, A. et al. (2016). Impact of 118. Food and Agriculture Organization of 128. Grand View Research(2019). Base 135. IUCN and International Council on 144. IPBES (2019). Global assessment report 154. Kavanagh. A.S. et al. (2019). Seismic
Forest Management on Species Rich- the United Nations and UNEP (2020). Metal Mining Market Size, Share and Mining and Metals (2004). Integrating on biodiversity and ecosystem services surveys reduce cetacean sightings
ness: Global Meta-Analysis and Eco- The State of the World’s Forests 2020. Trends Analysis Report By Product Mining and Biodiversity Conservation of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy across a large marine ecosystem.
nomic Trade-Offs. Scientific Reports, Forests, biodiversity and people. Rome. (Aluminum, Copper, Zinc, Lead), End Case studies from around the world. Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Scientific Reports, 9, 19164. https://doi.
6, 23954. https://doi.org/10.1038/ https://doi.org/10.4060/ca8642en Use (Construction, Automotive), By https://www.cbd.int/impact/case-stud- Services. E. S. Brondizio, J. Settele, org/10.1038/s41598-019-55500-4
srep23954 Region, And Segment Forecasts, ies/cs-impact-IUCN-ICMM-767rpt-en. S. Díaz, and H. T. Ngo (editors). IPBES
119. CIA(2020). The World Factbook. https:// 2019 – 2025. https://www.grand- pdf secretariat, Bonn, Germany 155. Butt, N. et al. (2013). Biodiversity
112. The Business Research Company www.cia.gov/library/publications/ viewresearch.com/industry-analysis/ Risks from Fossil Fuel Extraction.
(2020). Forestry And Logging Market - the-world-factbook/geos/ee.html base-metal-mining-market 136. Sonter, L.J. et al. (2018). Mining and 145. IUCN(2018). Deep Sea Mining Issues Science 342, (6157),425-6. https://doi.
By Type Of Product (Logging Products, biodiversity: key issues and research Brief. https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/ org/10.1126/science.1237261
Timber Services, Forest Products) Com- 120. Food and Agriculture Organization of 129. Grand View Research(2019). Base needs in conservation science. files/deep-sea_mining_issues_brief.pdf
petitive Landscape, And By Region, the United Nations and UNEP (2020). Metal Mining Market Size, Share and Proceedings of the Royal Society, 156. Harfoot, M.B.J. et al. (2018). Pres-
Opportunities And Strategies – Global The State of the World’s Forests 2020. Trends Analysis Report By Product 285 (1892) B. http://doi.org/10.1098/ 146. Niner, H.J. et al. (2018). Deep-Sea Min- ent and future biodiversity risks from
Forecast To 2023. https://www.thebusi- Forests, biodiversity and people. Rome. (Aluminum, Copper, Zinc, Lead), End rspb.2018.1926 ing With No Net Loss of Biodiversity— fossil fuel exploitation. Conservation
nessresearchcompany.com/report/ https://doi.org/10.4060/ca8642en Use (Construction, Automotive), By An Impossible Aim. Frontiers in Marine Letters, 11 (4). https://doi.org/10.1111/
forestry-and-logging-products-market Region, And Segment Forecasts, 137. OECD (2019). Mining and Green Growth Science, 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/ conl.12448
121. WWF (2020). Timber. https://www. 2019 – 2025. https://www.grand- in the EECCA Region. https://doi. fmars.2018.00053
113. Increasing adoption of paper and pulp worldwildlife.org/industries/timber viewresearch.com/industry-analysis/ org/10.1787/22229523. https://www. 157. Harfoot, M.B.J. et al. (2018). Pres-
in the packaging and printing indus- base-metal-mining-market oecd-ilibrary.org/environment/mining- 147. Van Dover, C. L. et al. (2017). Biodiver- ent and future biodiversity risks from
try due to preference of light-weight 122. Chaudhary, A. et. al. (2016). Impact of and-green-growth-in-the-eecca-re- sity loss from deep-sea mining. Nature fossil fuel exploitation. Conservation
materials and increasing demand in Forest Management on Species Rich- 130. Grand View Research (2020). Pre- gion_1926a45a-en Geoscience 10(7), 464–465. https://doi. Letters, 11 (4). https://doi.org/10.1111/
various end-use industries, especially ness: Global Meta-Analysis and Eco- cious Metal Market Size, Share and org/10.1038/ngeo2983 conl.12448
from the pharmaceutical and printing nomic Trade-Offs. Scientific Reports, Trends Analysis Report By Product 138. World Bank (2019). Forest-Smart
industries, are key factors contribut- 6, 23954. https://doi.org/10.1038/ (Gold, Silver, PGM), By Application Mining: Large-Scale Mining on Forests 148. Chatham House (2020). Resource 158. Harfoot, M.B.J. et al. (2018). Pres-
ing to a high CAGR of the PPI mar- srep23954 (Jewelry, Industrial, Investment), By (LSM) Trade.Earth. https://resourcetrade. ent and future biodiversity risks from
ket during the forecast period(2020, Region And Segment Forecasts, earth/ fossil fuel exploitation. Conservation
March 16). Globe Newswire. https:// 123. Cazzolla Gatti, R. et. al. (2015). The 2020 – 2027. https://www.grand- 139. Jacobi, C.M. et al. (2011). Soaring Letters, 11 (4). https://doi.org/10.1111/
www.globenewswire.com/news-re- impact of selective logging and viewresearch.com/industry-analysis/ Extinction Threats to Endemic Plants in 149. Bond, K. et al. (2020, June 4). Decline conl.12448
lease/2020/03/16/2001325/0/en/Paper- clearcutting on forest structure, tree precious-metals-market Brazilian Metal-Rich Regions. Ambio, and Fall: The Size and Vulnerability of
and-Pulp-Market-To-Reach-USD-679- diversity and above-ground biomass 40(5): 540–543. https://doi.org/10.1007/ the Fossil Fuel System. Carbon Tracker. 159. Esler, D. et al. (2018). Timelines and
72-Billion-By-2027-Reports-and-Data. of African tropical forests. Ecological 131. World Bank (2017). The Growing Role of s13280-011-0151-7 https://carbontracker.org/reports/ mechanisms of wildlife population
html Research, 30 (1), 119–132. https://doi. Minerals and Metals for a Low Carbon decline-and-fall/ recovery following the Exxon Valdez
org/10.1007/s11284-014-1217-3 Future. http://documents1.worldbank. 140. Sonter, L. et al. (2017). Mining drives oil spill. Deep Sea Research Part II:
114. Food and Agriculture Organization of org/curated/en/207371500386458722/ extensive deforestation in the Bra- 150. Bond, K. et al. (2020, June 4). Decline Topical Studies in Oceanography,
the United Nations(2018). Global Forest 124. Food and Agriculture Organization of pdf/117581-WP-P159838-PUBLIC-Cli- zilian Amazon. Nature Communica- and Fall: The Size and Vulnerability of 147, 36-42 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
Products Fact and Figures 2018. http:// the United Nations and UNEP (2020). mateSmartMiningJuly.pdf tions,8, 1013. https://doi.org/10.1038/ the Fossil Fuel System. Carbon Tracker. dsr2.2017.04.007
www.fao.org/3/ca7415en/ca7415en.pdf The State of the World’s Forests 2020. s41467-017-00557-w https://carbontracker.org/reports/
Forests, biodiversity and people. Rome. 132. World Bank (2017). The Growing Role of decline-and-fall/ 160. NOAA (2017, April 20). Deepwater Hori-
115. Food and Agriculture Organization of https://doi.org/10.4060/ca8642en Minerals and Metals for a Low Carbon 141. Garcia, L.C. et al. (2017). Brazil’s worst zon Oil Spill. https://oceanservice.noaa.
the United Nations and UNEP (2020). Future. http://documents1.worldbank. mining disaster: Corporations must be 151. Heede, R. (2014). Tracing anthropo- gov/news/apr17/dwh-protected-spe-
The State of the World’s Forests 2020. 125. Garrett, R.D. (2019). Criteria for effec- org/curated/en/207371500386458722/ compelled to pay the actual environ- genic carbon dioxide and methane cies.html
Forests, biodiversity and people. Rome. tive zero-deforestation commitments. pdf/117581-WP-P159838-PUBLIC-Cli- mental costs. Ecological Applications, emissions to fossil fuel and cement pro-
https://doi.org/10.4060/ca8642en Global Environmental Change, 54, mateSmartMiningJuly.pdf 27(1), 5–9. https://doi.org/10.1002/ ducers, 1854–2010. Climatic Change 161. Convention on Biological Diversity
135-147. eap.1461 122, 229–241. https://doi.org/10.1007/ N (2016). Biodiversity and climate
116. Seedre, M., et al. (2018). What is the 133. International Council on Mining s10584-013-0986-y change - Making use of the findings of
impact of continuous cover forestry 126. Chatham House (2020). Resource and Metals (2018). Role of Min- 142. Than, K. (2010, October 14) Toxic the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report.
compared to clearcut forestry on Trade.Earth. https://resourcetrade. ing in National Economies: Mining Mud Spill Latest Insult to Polluted 152. IEA(2020). The Oil and Gas Industry in https://www.cbd.int/climate/doc/biodi-
stand-level biodiversity in boreal earth/ Contribution Index (4th edition, Danube River. National Geographic. Energy Transitions. World Energy Out- versity-ar5-brochure-en.pdf
and temperate forests? A system- 2018). https://www.icmm.com/ https://www.nationalgeographic.com/ look Special Report. https://www.iea.
atic review protocol. Environmental 127. Van der Walt, E. and Pakiam, R. en-gb/society-and-the-economy/ news/2010/10/101012-toxic-spill-hun- org/reports/the-oil-and-gas-industry-in- 162. IUCN (2020). Species and Cli-
Evidence 7 28. https://doi.org/10.1186/ (2019, October 28). Why Palladium Is role-of-mining-in-national-economies/ gary-danube-river-water/ energy-transitions mate Change. https://www.iucn.
s13750-018-0138-y Suddenly the Most Precious Metal. mining-contribution-index org/theme/species/our-work/
Bloomberg. https://www.bloomberg. 143. Owen, J.R. et al. (2020). Catastrophic 153. Olson, C. and Lenzmann, F. (2016). The species-and-climate-change
117. Food and Agriculture Organization of com/news/articles/2019-10-28/ 134. World Bank (2017). The Growing Role of tailings dam failures and disaster social and economic consequences
the United Nations and UNEP (2020). why-palladium-is-sudden- Minerals and Metals for a Low Carbon risk disclosure. International Jour- of the fossil fuel supply chain. MRS 163. Convention on Biological Diversi-
The State of the World’s Forests 2020. ly-a-more-precious-metal-quick- Future. http://documents1.worldbank. nal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 42, Energy and Sustainability, 3, E6. https:// tyN (2016). Biodiversity and climate
Forests, biodiversity and people. Rome. take-k2ap4ryc org/curated/en/207371500386458722/ 101361. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. doi.org/10.1557/mre.2016.7 change - Making use of the findings of
https://doi.org/10.4060/ca8642en pdf/117581-WP-P159838-PUBLIC-Cli- ijdrr.2019.101361 the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report.
mateSmartMiningJuly.pdf https://www.cbd.int/climate/doc/biodi-
versity-ar5-brochure-en.pdf
===== page 60 =====
Endnotes
164. IPBES (2019. Nature’s Dangerous 173. Grand View Research (2020, Feb- 182. Davidson, N. C. et al. (2001). Biodi- 192. WTTC(2020). Economic Impact Reports. 201. Hall. M.C. (2010). Tourism and biodi- 210. Lenzen, M. et. al. (2018). The carbon
Decline ‘Unprecedented’ Species ruary). Ready-Mix Concrete Market versity impacts of large dams. UNEP. https://wttc.org/Research/Econom- versity: more significant than climate footprint of global tourism. Nature Cli-
Extinction Rates ‘Accelerating’ [Press Size Worth $1,206.1 Billion By 2027 Background Paper Nr. 1. Prepared for ic-Impact/moduleId/1226/itemId/67/ change? Journal of Heritage Tourism, 5 mate Change, 8, 522–528. https://doi.
Release]. https://ipbes.net/news/ [Press Release]. https://www.grand- IUCN / UNEP / WCD controller/DownloadRequest/action/ (4), 253-266. https://doi.org/10.1080/17 org/10.1038/s41558-018-0141-x
Media-Release-Global-Assessment viewresearch.com/press-release/ QuickDownload 43873X.2010.517843
global-ready-mix-concrete-market 183. IPBES (2019). Global assessment report 211. Hayaloglu, P. (2015). The Impact of
165. Román-Palacios, C. and Wiens, J.J. on biodiversity and ecosystem services 193. OECD (2020). OECD Tourism Trends 202. Spalding, M. et al. (2017). Mapping Developments in the Logistics Sector
(2020). Recent responses to climate 174. Marcantonio, M. et al. (2013). Biodiver- of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy and Policies 2020. Key Findings. the global value and distribution of on Economic Growth: The Case of
change reveal the drivers of species sity, roads, and landscape fragmenta- Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem https://www.oecd.org/cfe/tour- coral reef tourism. Marine Policy, 82, OECD Countries. International Journal
extinction and survival. PNAS,117 (8), tion: Two Mediterranean cases. Applied Services. E. S. Brondizio, J. Settele, ism/2020-Tourism-Brochure.pdf 104-113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. of Economics and Financial Issues,
4211-4217; https://doi.org/10.1073/ Geography, 42, 63-72. https://doi. S. Díaz, and H. T. Ngo (editors). IPBES marpol.2017.05.014 5(2), 523-530.
pnas.1913007117 org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2013.05.001 secretariat, Bonn, Germany 194. Arionesei. G. et al. (2014). Tourism
Today: Why is it a global phenome- 203. Lamb, J. B. et al. (2014). Scuba 212. United Nations(2020). UN Comtrade
166. Global Infrastructure Hub(2020). Global 175. IPBES (2019). Global assessment report 184. Zarfl. C. et al. (2015). A global boom in non? [Conference Paper]. International diving damage and intensity of tourist Database. https://comtrade.un.org/
Infrastructure Outlook. https://outlook. on biodiversity and ecosystem services hydropower dam construction. Aquatic Conference “Sustainable Develop- activities increases coral disease
gihub.org/ of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Sciences, 77, 161–170. https://doi. ment in Conditions of Economic prevalence. Biological Conservation, 213. Goldsby, T.J. et al. (2014). The Critical
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem org/10.1007/s00027-014-0377-0 Instability” - 3rd Edition, 20-21 June 178, 88-96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. Role of Transportation in Business
167. International Hydropower Associa- Services. E. S. Brondizio, J. Settele, 2014, Satu-Mare, Romania. https:// biocon.2014.06.027 and the Economy. InformIT. https://
tion (2020). World Hydropower Map. S. Díaz, and H. T. Ngo (editors). IPBES 185. IUCN. (n.d.). The Future of Dams. www.researchgate.net/publica- www.informit.com/articles/article.
https://www.hydropower.org/maps/ secretariat, Bonn, Germany https://digital.iucn.org/water/ tion/267854905_Tourism_Today_Why_ 204. Baffa, R.B. et al. (2018). Sunscreen aspx?p=2171313
worldhydropowerstatistics the-future-of-dams/ Is_It_a_Global_Phenomenon bans: Coral reefs and skin cancer.
176. Meijer, J.R. et al. (2018). Global Journal of Clinical Pharmacy and Ther- 214. Greenwoods Ltd.(2020). The role of
168. Global Infrastructure Hub(2020). Global patterns of current and future road 186. Jong, H.N. (2018, July 13) . Scien- 195. Lyon, S. and Wells, C. (2012). Global apeutics, 44 (1). Commentary. https:// logistics in the international economy.
Infrastructure Outlook. https://outlook. infrastructure. Environmental Research tists urge Indonesian president to nix Tourism: Cultural Heritage and Eco- doi.org/10.1111/jcpt.12778 https://greenwoods.org/the-role-of-
gihub.org/ Letters, 13 (6), 064006. https://doi. dam in orangutan habitat. Mongabay. nomic Encounters. Alta Mira Press logistics-in-the-intl-economy/?cn-re-
org/10.1088/1748-9326/aabd42 https://news.mongabay.com/2018/07/ 205. Baffa, R.B. et al. (2018). Sunscreen loaded=1
169. Meijer, J.R. et al. (2018). Global scientists-urge-indonesian-presi- 196. WTTC (2020). Travel and Tourism bans: Coral reefs and skin cancer.
patterns of current and future road 177. Kleinschroth, F. et al. (2019). Road dent-to-nix-dam-in-orangutan-habitat/ Economic Impact from COVID-19. Journal of Clinical Pharmacy and Ther- 215. Sezer, S. and Abasiz, T. (2017). The
infrastructure. Environmental Research expansion and persistence in forests of https://wttc.org/Research/Econom- apeutics, 44 (1). Commentary. https:// Impact of Logistics Industry On Eco-
Letters, 13 (6), 064006. https://doi. the Congo Basin. Nature Sustainability, 187. Miller, S.A. et al. (2018). Impacts of ic-Impact/moduleId/1227/itemId/68/ doi.org/10.1111/jcpt.12778 nomic Growth: An Application in OECD
org/10.1088/1748-9326/aabd42 2, 628–634. https://doi.org/10.1038/ booming concrete production on controller/DownloadRequest/action/ Countries. Eurasian Journal of Social
s41893-019-0310-6 water resources worldwide. Nature QuickDownload 206. Baffa, R.B. et al. (2018). Sunscreen Sciences, 5(1), 11-23.
170. Barber, C. P. et al. (2014). Roads, defor- Sustainability, 1, 69–76. https://doi. bans: Coral reefs and skin cancer.
estation, and the mitigating effect of 178. Psaralexi M. K. et al. 2017. Importance org/10.1038/s41893-017-0009-5 197. Hall. M.C. (2010). Tourism and biodi- Journal of Clinical Pharmacy and Ther- 216. Maiden, T. (2020). How big is the
protected areas in the Amazon. Biologi- of Roadless Areas for the European versity: more significant than climate apeutics, 44 (1). Commentary. https:// logistics industry? Freight Waves.
cal Conservation 177, 203-209. https:// Conservation Network. Frontiers in 188. IUCN.(n.d.). Cement and aggre- change? Journal of Heritage Tourism, 5 doi.org/10.1111/jcpt.12778 https://www.freightwaves.com/news/
doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2014.07.004 Ecology and Evolution, 5. https://doi. gates. https://www.iucn.org/theme/ (4), 253-266. https://doi.org/10.1080/17 how-big-is-the-logistics-industry
org/10.3389/fevo.2017.00002 business-and-biodiversity/our-work/ 43873X.2010.517843 207. Moscovici, D. (2017). Environmental
171. IPBES (2019). Global assessment report business-engagement-sector/ Impacts of Cruise Ships on Island 217. IMARC Group (2020). Global Logis-
on biodiversity and ecosystem services 179. IUCN (n.d.) The Future of Dams. cement-and-aggregates 198. Habibullah, M.S. et al. (2015). Tourism Nations. Peace Review, 29 (3), 366- tics Market to Reach US$ 6,537
of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy https://digital.iucn.org/water/ and Biodiversity Loss: Implications 373. https://doi.org/10.1080/10402659. Billion by 2025, Catalyzed by Signif-
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem the-future-of-dams/ 189. Lehne, J. and Preston, F. (2018). for Business Sustainability. Proce- 2017.1344580 icant Growth in Online Retail Sec-
Services. E. S. Brondizio, J. Settele, Making Concrete Change Innovation dia Economics and Finance, 35, tor. https://www.imarcgroup.com/
S. Díaz, and H. T. Ngo (editors). IPBES 180. Barbarossa, V. et al. (2020). Impacts in Low-carbon Cement and Concrete. 166 – 172. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 208. Kennedy, M (2019, June 4). Carnival global-logistics-market
secretariat, Bonn, Germany of current and future large dams on Chatham House Report. https://www. S2212-5671(16)00021-6 Cruise Lines hit with $20 million penalty
the geographic range connectivity chathamhouse.org/sites/default/files/ for environmental crimes. NPR. https:// 218. Maiden, T. (2020). How big is the
172. Shameela, S.F. et al. (2016) Indus- of freshwater fish worldwide. PNAS, publications/2018-06-13-making-con- 199. Christ, C. et al. (2003). Tourism and www.npr.org/2019/06/04/729622653/ logistics industry? Freight Waves.
trial Wastes in Concrete Mixtures 117 (7), 3648-3655. DOI: 10.1073/ crete-change-cement-lehne-preston- Biodiversity: Mapping Tourism’s Global carnival-cruise-lines-hit-with-20-million- https://www.freightwaves.com/news/
- A Review. International Advanced pnas.1912776117 final.pdf Footprint. Conservation International penalty-for-environmental-crimes how-big-is-the-logistics-industry
Research Journal in Science, Engineer- and UNEP, Washington.
ing and Technology, 5 (1) https://iarjset. 181. Barbarossa, V. et al. 2020. Impacts of 190. World Bank (2020). International 209. Caric, H. and Mackelworth, P. (2014). 219. Rodrigue, J-P. (2020). The Geogra-
com/upload/2016/si/nCORETech-16/ current and future large dams on the tourism, receipts (current US$). https:// 200. Christ, C. et al. (2003). Tourism and Cruise tourism environmental impacts phy of Transport Systems. New York:
nCORETech%208.pdf geographic range connectivity of fresh- data.worldbank.org/indicator/ST.INT. Biodiversity: Mapping Tourism’s Global - The perspective from the Adriatic Routledge.
water fish worldwide. Proceedings of RCPT.CD?end=2018andstart=1995and- Footprint. Conservation International Sea. Ocean and Coastal Management,
the National Academy of Sciences, 117 view=chart and UNEP, Washington. 102, 350-363. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
(7) 3648-3655. https://doi.org/10.1073/ ocecoaman.2014.09.008
pnas.1912776117 191. WTTC ( 2020). Economic Impact.
https://wttc.org/Research/
Economic-Impact
===== page 61 =====
Endnotes
220. IPBES (2019). Global assessment report 223. Panigada S. et al. (2008). Chapter 1 226. Sims R., R. et al. (2014): Transport. In:
on biodiversity and ecosystem services Biodiversity impacts of ship move- Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of
of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy ment, noise, grounding and anchoring. Climate Change. Contribution of Work-
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem In: IUCN. Maritime traffic effects on ing Group III to the Fifth Assessment
Services. E. S. Brondizio, J. Settele, biodiversity in the Mediterranean Sea. Report of the Intergovern-mental Panel
S. Díaz, and H. T. Ngo (editors). IPBES Volume 1 - Review of impacts, priority on Climate Change. Cambridge Univer-
secretariat, Bonn, Germany areas and mitigation measures. https:// sity Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
portals.iucn.org/library/sites/library/ and New York, NY, USA.
221. Panigada S. et al. (2008). Chapter 1 files/documents/2008-042-1.pdf
Biodiversity impacts of ship move- 227. Ali, Z (2020, April 13). The world’s 100
ment, noise, grounding and anchoring. 224. Panigada S. et al. (2008). Chapter 1 largest banks – 2020. S&P Global.
In: IUCN. Maritime traffic effects on Biodiversity impacts of ship move- https://www.spglobal.com/marketint-
biodiversity in the Mediterranean Sea. ment, noise, grounding and anchoring. elligence/en/news-insights/research/
Volume 1 - Review of impacts, priority In: IUCN. Maritime traffic effects on the-worlds-100-largest-banks-2020.
areas and mitigation measures. https:// biodiversity in the Mediterranean Sea. Viewed in August 2020, Annual
portals.iucn.org/library/sites/library/ Volume 1 - Review of impacts, priority Reports, Financial reports.
files/documents/2008-042-1.pdf areas and mitigation measures. https://
portals.iucn.org/library/sites/library/ 228. Profundo. 2020.
222. Rodrigue, J-P. (2020). The Geogra- files/documents/2008-042-1.pdf
phy of Transport Systems. New York:
Routledge 225. Rodrigue, J-P. (2020). The Geogra-
phy of Transport Systems. New York:
Routledge
Bankrolling
portfolio.earth
info@portfolio.earth
Report design by Jory & Co